Neural Fragility as an EEG Marker of the Seizure Onset
Zone
Adam Li1,9, Chester Huynh1,9, Zachary Fitzgerald2, Iahn Cajigas3, Damian
Brusko3, Jonathan Jagid3, Angel Claudio4, Andres Kanner4, Jennifer Hopp5,
Stephanie Chen5, Jennifer Haagensen5, Emily Johnson6, William Anderson6,
Nathan Crone6,8, Sara Inati7, Kareem Zaghloul7, Juan Bulacio2, Jorge
Gonzalez-Martinez8,*, and Sridevi V. Sarma1,9,*
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
United States
2Epilepsy Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, United States
3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, United States
4Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
United States
5Neurology, University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, United States
6Neurology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, United States
7Surgical Neurology Branch, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda MD
8Neurosurgery, and Epilepsy Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, United States
9Institute for Computational Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
United States
*Co-senior authors
November 14, 2020
One Sentence Summary: Neural fragility, an intracranial EEG biomarker for the seizure
onset zone in drug-resistant epilepsy, predicts surgical outcomes with high accuracy.
Abstract
Over 15 million epilepsy patients worldwide do not respond to drugs. Successful surgical
treatment requires complete removal, or disconnection of the seizure onset zone (SOZ),
brain region(s) where seizures originate. Unfortunately, surgical success rates vary between
30%-70% because no clinically validated biological marker of the SOZ exists. We develop
and retrospectively validate a new EEG marker - neural fragility . We validate this new
marker in a retrospective analysis of 91 patients by using neural fragility of the annotated
1Also reachable at adam2392 at gmail dot com. Also reachable at the NCSL website:
https://sarmalab.icm.jhu.edu/. Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
21218
1. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
SOZ as a metric to predict surgical outcomes. Fragility predicts 43/47 surgical failures with
an overall prediction accuracy of 76%, compared to the accuracy of clinicians being 48%
(successful outcomes). In failed outcomes, we identify fragile regions that were untreated.
When compared to 20 EEG features proposed as SOZ markers, fragility outperformed in
predictive power and interpretability suggesting neural fragility as an EEG ﬁngerprint of the
SOZ.
1 Introduction
Over 15 million epilepsy patients worldwide and 1 million in the US suﬀer from drug-resistant
epilepsy (DRE) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. DRE is deﬁned as continued seizures despite adequate trials of two
tolerated appropriately chosen anti-epileptic drugs [6]. DRE patients have an increased risk of
sudden death and are frequently hospitalized, burdened by epilepsy-related disabilities, and the
cost of their care is a signiﬁcant contributor to the $16 billion dollars spent annually in the US
treating epilepsy patients [7, 8]. Approximately 50% of DRE patients have focal DRE, where a
speciﬁc brain region or regions, termed the epileptogenic zone (EZ), is necessary and suﬃcient for
initiating seizures and whose removal (or disconnection) is necessary for complete abolition of
seizures [9, 10, 11, 12]. The EZ encompasses the clinically identiﬁed seizure onset zone (SOZ)
and early propagation zone (EPZ). The brain regions associated with the SOZdemonstrate the
earliest electrophysiological changes during a seizure event, and in general precede the clinical
onset of seizures; and the EPZ regions are involved at the time of the earliest clinical (semiological)
manifestations during a seizure event. Successful surgical and neuromodulatory treatments can
stop seizures altogether or allow them to be controlled with medications [13, 14, 15], but outcomes
for both treatments critically depend on accurate localization of the SOZ.
Localizing the SOZalso relies on accurate placement of electrodes such that they cover the
EZ, and the ability to identify abnormalities in the iEEG channels that may correlate to the SOZ
with the naked eye. Unfortunately, even the most experienced clinicians are challenged because
epilepsy is fundamentally a network disease, which cannot be entirely deﬁned by the current
methods of localization. Abnormal connections across several channels may constitute a more
eﬀective marker of the SOZ[16]. Localization thus lends itself to a data-driven network-based
computational approach and several EEG algorithms have been proposed to localize the SOZ
from recordings. Many entail investigations of the spectral power in each iEEG channel including
high frequency oscillations [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], but these approaches do not consider
network properties of the brain because they treat each EEG channel independently. Others have
proposed graph-based analysis of iEEG [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35], but these
approaches fail to identify internal network properties that cause seizures to occur in the ﬁrst
place.
In this study, we propose a new EEG marker of the SOZ, neural fragility, of brain regions
(conceptually described in Figure 1). To create our fragility marker, we ﬁrst build a personalized
dynamic model of the brain network from observed iEEG signals. The model is generative in
that it can accurately reconstruct the patient’s iEEG recordings [36, 37]. Using this model, we
then calculate which network nodes are imbalanced, meaning they have more excitatory or less
inhibitory inﬂuence on the network and thus can trigger seizures. Neural fragility measures the
degree to which a node is imbalanced [38]. To evaluate neural fragility as a marker of the SOZ,
we conducted a retrospective study using iEEG data from 91 patients treated across 5 epilepsy
centers: Johns Hopkins Hospital, National Institute of Health, Cleveland Clinic, University of
Maryland Medical Center and Jackson Memorial Hospital, University of Miami. In the study
population, all DRE patients underwent invasive iEEG monitoring followed by surgical resection
or laser ablation of the SOZ(44 success and 47 failure outcome). We demonstrate that neural
2. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
fragility is higher/lower in electrode contacts within clinically annotated SOZs for success/failure
patients. In addition, we compare fragility of iEEG nodes to 6 frequency-based and 14 graph
theoretic features in a 10-fold nested-cross validation. Neural fragility has an area under the curve
(AUC) discrimination score of 0.88 +/- 0.064, which is 13% better compared to the next best
feature. In addition, it has a high degree of interpretability, which we demonstrate by computing
an interpretability ratio suggesting that the spatiotemporal heatmaps of neural fragility are a
robust iEEG ﬁngerprint of the SOZthat can incorporate seamlessly into the clinical workﬂow.
EI
EI
BALANCED EEG  NETWORK 
UNBALANCED EEG NETWORK 
Figure 1: Neural fragility intuition (Top) iEEG traces in between seizures (left) and during
a seizure (right). (Bottom) network schematic showing change in connectivity (right) in fragile
node that causes seizure. Describes qualitatively the concept of neural fragility in the context of a
dynamical iEEG network, with nodes representing excitatory ( E) and inhibitory ( I) population of
neurons. From a dynamical systems point of view, such imbalance arises from a few fragile nodes
causing instability of the network in the form of over-excitation, or under-inhibition. We deﬁne
fragility of a network node to be the minimum perturbation applied to the node’s functional
connectivity to its neighbors before rendering the network unstable [38, 36]. In system theory,
stable systems return to a baseline condition when a node is perturbed. In contrast, unstable
systems can oscillate and grow when a node is perturbed. In the context of epilepsy, a fragile
node is one that requires a smaller perturbation to lead to seizure activity.
3. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)
CLINICAL COMPLEXITY
1
2
3
4NORMAL BRAINEZ REGIONLESION (b)
CONFIDENCE IN HYPOTHESIZED SOZ PREDICTS OUTCOME𝑷(𝑺𝒖𝒄𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔)SPATIOTEMPORAL FEATURE MAPS SPLIT BY HYPOTHESIZED SOZ
STRUCTURED REPRESENTATION OF THE SOZ & 𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑪……Ensemble of decision trees… 
… SPATIOTEMPORAL iEEGMAPSPRIOR CLINICAL KNOWLEDGE AND CONCORDANCE OF DATACONSENSUS TO DETERMINE CONFIDENCE IN SOZ
CONSENSUS TO DETERMINE CONFIDENCE IN SOZSURGERY
MRISPECT
PET SCANDTI
MEG
Scalp EEG
Time
Electrodes (𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑪	𝐚𝐧𝐝	𝐒𝐎𝐙)
COMPARE(SOZ sufficient?)Engel
Figure 2: Clinical complexity and our experimental paradigm (a) Schematic of the
diﬃculty of diﬀerent epilepsy etiologies that might arise in DRE patients. Since there is no
biomarker for the EZ and it is never observed directly, the network mechanisms that cause seizures
are complex. Case clinical complexity ordered by increasing localization diﬃculty: lesional (1),
focal temporal (2), focal extratemporal (3), and multi-focal (4) that are present in the dataset.
These four categories simplify the possible EZ presentations, but provide a broad categorization
of simple to complex cases observed in the clinic. (b)Is a schematic of our experimental design
starting with iEEG data. (top row) We evaluate various representations of iEEG in the form of
spatiotemporal heatmaps, create a partitioned summary of the clinically annotated SOZaround
seizure onset, feed them into a Random Forest classiﬁer and computed a probability of success
(i.e. a conﬁdence score) in the clinically hypothesized SOZ. The probability was then compared
with the actual outcome of patients. (bottom row) Shows a simpliﬁed analogous workﬂow
that clinicians take to evaluate their conﬁdence in a proposed SOZlocalization resulting in
a surgery. During invasive monitoring, clinicians identify the SOZfrom iEEG patterns (e.g.
spiking/rhythmic activity). An estimate of the true EZ is then created using a combination of the
clinicalSOZhypothesis and non-invasive ﬁndings. When possible, subsequent surgical resection
or laser ablation, generally including the SOZalong with a variable extent of additional tissue,
is performed. Post-operatively, patients are followed for 12+ months and categorized as either
success, or failure as deﬁned in Section 6.2. This translates to clinical outcomes measured by
Engel or ILAE score. In order for a feature to be an accurate representation of the underlying
epileptic phenomena, the following assumptions are made. As a result of seizure freedom, one can
assume that the clinically hypothesized SOZwas suﬃcient, and the probability of success has a
high value. In contrast, if seizures continue, then the SOZwas not suﬃcient and the probability
should have a low value.
4. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 Results
There is no clinically validated biomarker of the SOZ, yet it forms an important component for
the location of the underlying EZ [39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44]. This presents a serious challenge for
clinicians to accurately localize the SOZand has led to surgical success rates to vary between 30-
70% despite large brain regions being removed. With no biomarker available, clinicians are driven
to perform extensive evaluations with neuroimaging, clinical testing, and visual inspection of scalp
electroencephalography (EEG) recordings (Figure 2). When non-invasive tests are inconclusive,
patients undergo intracranial monitoring, during which intracranial EEG (iEEG) electrodes
are either placed directly on the cortex or implanted into the brain (example in Supplemental
Figure 7). iEEG provides high temporal resolution data that enables clinicians to visually detect
abnormal activity, such as spikes and high frequency bursts, in between seizures (interictal) and
during seizures (ictal). Speciﬁcally, clinicians attempt to identify the electrodes involved in the
SOZand early spread [45, 46, 47, 11, 12]. Surgical resection is then performed on the basis of
this hypothesis, unless the region overlaps with eloquent cortex [48].
We analyze all patient’s iEEG using fragility and 20 other baseline features, resulting in
spatiotemporal heatmaps per feature for every patient. The baseline features include spectral
power in various frequency bands (e.g. delta band 1-4 Hz) and speciﬁc graph measures of bivariate
correlation measures (e.g. eigenvector centrality and degree of correlation and coherence matrices),
which have been previously reported in the literature to correlate to the SOZ[27, 26, 28, 29, 30,
25, 31, 35, 49]. We consider all of these as potential EEG features that can represent the data in
diﬀerent ways, potentially useful for SOZlocalization.
2.1 Description of Neural Fragility
Neural fragility is a paradigm shift in the EEG analytics space. It is a concept based on the
conjecture that focal seizures arise from a few fragile nodes, i.e., the SOZ, which renders the
cortical epileptic network on the brink of instability. We begin with an intuitive explanation
of neural fragility in Figure 1 (for a two-node quantitative example, see Supplemental Figure
11). When one observes iEEG data during interictal, or preictal periods (Figure 1, top left),
activity recorded from each channel is noisy and hovers around a baseline value. In contrast,
when one observes iEEG data during a seizure event (Figure 1, top right), activity (i) grows in
amplitude, (ii) oscillates, and (iii) spreads in the brain. From a dynamical systems perspective,
the iEEG network has switched from a stable (non-seizure) to an unstable (seizure) network. The
only diﬀerence between the left and right iEEG network in Figure 1 is the connection strengths
representing the dynamical interactions between a few channels, i.e., the SOZ. Our conjecture
is that small changes in connection strengths at SOZnodes cause an imbalance in connectivity
between inhibitory (I) and excitatory (E) populations (nodes) in the region. Either inhibition is
decreased and/or excitation is increased; thus, if the SOZis perturbed then over excitation can
occur manifesting in a seizure.
2.2 Fragility heatmap highlights the clinical SOZin successful patients
To qualitatively assess the usefulness of fragility in localizing electrodes of interest, we ﬁrst look
at speciﬁc examples of patients with varying outcomes and epilepsy etiologies (see Figure 2).
We analyzed with fragility and demonstrate how it may provide additional information for SOZ
localization. In Figure 3, we show an example of three diﬀerent patients with diﬀering surgical
treatments, outcomes, Engel class and clinical complexity along with their fragility heatmaps and
corresponding raw iEEG data (for full clinical deﬁnitions; see Supplementary Excel table).
5. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
In Figure 3a, the red electrode labels on the y-axis correspond to the clinical SOZelectrodes;
note that the red electrodes are typically a subset of the resected region. This ﬁgure shows the
period 10 seconds before and after electrographic seizure onset, indicated by the black dashed line.
In Patient_1, the clinical SOZshows a high degree of fragility, even before seizure onset, which
is not visibly clear in the raw EEG. The heatmap for Patient_1 also captures the propagation
of seizure activity (Supplementary Figure 15). This patient had a successful surgery, and so we
can assume the epileptogenic tissue within the clinical resection likely contained the SOZand
EPZ regions; it is likely the clinicians correctly localized the EZ. When viewing the raw EEG
data in Figure 3b (top), Patient_1 has iEEG signatures that are readily visible around seizure
EEG onset (Figure 3b). We see high-frequency and synchronized spiking activity at onset that
occurs in electrodes that clinicians annotated as SOZ, which correspond to the most fragile
electrodes at onset. In addition, the fragility heatmap captures the onset in the ATTandAD
electrodes and early spread of the seizure into the PDelectrodes. Speciﬁcally, ATT1 (anterior
temporal lobe area) shows high fragility during the entire period before seizure onset (Figure
3). This area was not identiﬁed with scalp EEG, or non-invasive neuroimaging. In this patient,
the fragility heatmap agreed with clinical visual EEG analysis, identifying the SOZ, which was
included in the surgery and led to a seizure free patient.
2.3 Fragility heatmap highlights other possibly epileptic regions out-
side the SOZin failed patients
In Figure 3, Patient_26 and Patient_40 both show distinct regions with high fragility that were
notin the clinically annotated SOZ(or the resected region), and both had recurrent seizures
after surgery. Speciﬁcally in Patient_26, the ABT (anterior basal temporal lobe) ,PBT
(posterior basal temporal lobe) andRTG29-39 (mesial temporal lobe) electrodes were
highly fragile, but not annotated as SOZ. Patient_40 had laser ablation performed on the
electrode region associated with Q2, which was not fragile. From seizure onset, many electrodes
exhibit the EEG signatures that are clinically relevant, such as spiking and fast-wave activity
[46]. In this patient, the X’ (posterior-cingulate) ,U’ (posterior-insula) andN’/M’/F’
(superior frontal gyrus) were all fragile compared to the Q2electrode, which recorded from
a lesion in the right periventricular nodule. Patient_26 had a resection performed in the right
anterior temporal lobe region. Clinicians identiﬁed the RAD,RHDandRTG40/48 electrodes
as theSOZ. In the raw EEG data, one can see synchronized spikes and spike-waves in these
electrodes, but the patient had seizures continue after resection. In the corresponding fragility
heatmap, the ABTand theRTG29-32 electrodes are highly fragile compared to the clinically
annotatedSOZregion. In the raw EEG shown in Figure 3b, it is not visibly clear that these
electrodes would be part of the SOZ. Visual analysis of the EEG was insuﬃcient for Patient_26
and Patient_40, which ultimately led to insuﬃcient localizations and then to failed surgical
outcomes. Based on the fragility heatmaps, the fragile regions could be hypothesized to be part
of theSOZ, and possibly candidates for resection.
2.4 Fragility outperforms all iEEG features in predicting surgical out-
comes
To test the validity of neural fragility and the baseline features as SOZmarkers, we investigate
each feature’s ability to predict surgical outcomes of patients when stratiﬁed by the set of SOZ
contacts and the rest which we denote as the SOZcomplement, SOZC. To do so, we trained a
Structured Random Forest model (RF) [50, 51, 52] for each feature that takes in a partitioned
spatiotemporal heatmap based on the clinically annotated SOZand generates a probability of
6. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Seizure Onset(a)
PDADPSTASTATTSLTIFSFGMLTPLTILT
Q
BE’B’F’T’U’P’M’N’
O’C’R’X’
Patient_1
 (b)
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0ATT1
ATT2
AD1
AD2
AD3
AD4
PD1
PD2
PD3
PD4
ILT1
ILT2
ILT3
ILT4
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0ABT1
ABT2
RAD1
RAD2
RAD3
RAD4
RAD5
RAD6
RAD7
RHD1
RHD2
RHD3
RHD4
RHD5
RHD6
RHD7
RHD8
RHD9
RTG29
RTG30
RTG31
RTG32
RTG40
RTG48
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0Q1
Q2
X'1
U'1
F'2
M'4
M'5
N'4
N'5
N'6
Figure
3:Fragility heatmaps, and corresponding raw EEG traces of successful and
failed outcome patients. (a) From top to bottom, Patient_1 (success, NIH treated, CC1,
Engel score 1), Patient_26 (failure, JHH treated, CC3, Engel score 4), and Patient_40 (failure,
CClinic treated, CC4, Engel score 3) are shown respectively. The color scale represents the
amplitude of the normalized fragility metric, with closer to 1 denoting fragile regions and closer
to 0 denoting relatively stable regions. (Left)Overlaid average neural fragility value of each
electrode in the window of analysis we used. Black dark squares represent a depth electrode that
is not shown easily on the brain. Black lines outline where the clinicians labeled SOZ. Note
in Patient_26, RAD and RHD electrodes are denoted by the squares with the color showing
the average over the entire electrode. (Right) Clinically annotated heatmaps of the implanted
ECoG/SEEG electrodes with red y-axis denoting SOZ contacts. The red contacts are also part of
the surgical resection in these patients. Data is shown in the turbo colormap. Best seen if viewed
in color.(b)Corresponding raw EEG data for each patient with electrodes on y-axis and time on
x-axis with the dashed white-lines denoting seizure onset. Each shows 10 seconds before seizure
onset marked by epileptologists, and 10 seconds after. EEG was set at a monopolar reference with
line noise ﬁltered out. Each EEG snapshot is shown at a ﬁxed scale for that speciﬁc snapshot
that was best for visualization, ranging from 200 uV to 2000 uV.
7. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
success - a conﬁdence score in the clinical hypothesis. We test each feature’s model on a held
out data set by applying a varying threshold to the model’s output and computing a receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve plots true positive rates versus false
positive rates and the area under the curve (AUC) is a measure of predictive power of the feature.
The larger the AUC, the more predictive the feature is and thus the more valid it is as an iEEG
marker of the SOZ. We also compute the precision (PR) or positive predictive value (PPV) for
each feature, which is the proportion of predicted successful or "positive" results that are true
positives (actual successful surgeries). In addition, we compute the negative predictive value
(NPV) as well. The larger the PPV/NPV, the more predictive the feature is and thus the more
valid it is as an iEEG marker of the SOZ.
Since each patient’s implantation has a varying number of electrodes, we summarize each
feature’s distribution of the SOZandSOZCelectrodes into quantile statistics over time (for
details, see Methods 4). As an input to the RF models, we compute the quantile statistics over
time of the SOZandSOZCset for each patient and each feature. This allows each patient’s
heatmaps to have the same dimensions, which can be input into a machine learning RF model.
RF models are attractive because they are non-parametric, are interpretable (they are just a set
of decision trees performing a consensus procedure), and are able to handle higher dimensional
data better compared to other models, such as Logistic Regression [53]. As an output of the
trained RF model, each heatmap gets mapped to a probability that the outcome will be a success.
An RF model is tuned for each feature through 10-fold cross-validation (CV; see Methods section
for full details), resulting in a uniform and rigorous benchmark against neural fragility on the
same set of patients. Note that the "high-gamma" frequency band feature encompasses what
some would consider HFOs (i.e. 90-300 Hz) activity.
In terms of AUC (measures discrimination), neural fragility performs the best (Figure 4a).
Compared to the top 3 leading baseline features, neural fragility outperforms the beta band
(15-30 Hz) power by more than 13%. The AUC of fragility is the highest with a value of 0.88
+/- 0.064, compared to the next best representation, the beta frequency band, with a value of
0.82 +/- 0.040. From the ROC (and PR) curves, we observe that the fragility consistently has a
higher sensitivity for the same false positive rate compared to the 20 other feature representations
(Supplemental Figure 17). In terms of eﬀect size, neural fragility improves over the beta frequency
band with a large [54] eﬀect size of 0.97 Cohen’s D with 9 out of 10 folds improving the AUC
(Paired Wilcoxon Rank-sum PValue = 0.027 (see Supplemental Figure 17). As a result of the
10-fold CV, we can compare the AUC on the same set of patients in a paired eﬀect size and
statistical test improving AUC on 9 out of the 10 CV folds.
In terms of PR (measures PPV), neural fragility also performs the best (Figure 4b). IN terms
of average precision, which weighs the predictive power in terms of the total number of patients,
neural fragility also obtains an average precision of 0.83 +/- 0.076, which is >5% better than the
next best feature. In addition, compared to the clinical surgical success rate of 47%, fragility had
a 76% +/- 6% accuracy in predicting surgical outcome, a PPV of 0.903 +/- 0.103 and a NPV
of 0.872 +/- 0.136. In terms of PR, neural fragility improves over the beta band power with a
medium [54] eﬀect size of 0.57 Cohen’s D with 8 out of 10 folds improving the PR (PValue =
0.08).
When we compare the diﬀerences in the success probabilities predicted by the models stratiﬁed
by surgical outcomes, we observe that neural fragility has the highest eﬀect size of 1.507 (1.233-
1.763 - 95% conﬁdence interval) (Figure 4c) and lowest pvalue of 6.748e-31 (Figure 4d). In
addition to having good discrimination, we compute how well-calibrated the model is, having the
success probabilities values reﬂect true risk strata in the patient population. We quantify how well
calibrated the success probability distributions are over the held-out test set. In Supplementary
Figure 16, we show that the RF model trained on neural fragility produces well-calibrated success
8. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
probability values. A perfectly calibrated model would have a 20% conﬁdence in a set of patients
with exactly 20% success outcomes. The Brier-loss (a measure of calibration; 0 being perfect)
was 0.162 +/- 0.036, which was a 6.7% improvement compared to the next best feature.
(a)
FragilityBeta
Gamma-coh-centTheta-coh-centDeltaGammaTheta
HighgammaBeta-coh-centAlpha
Alpha-coh-centCorr-cent
Highgamma-coh-centDelta-coh-cent Beta-coh-degAlpha-coh-deg Theta-coh-degCorr-deg
Delta-coh-degGamma-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-deg
Feature
(Sorted by Mean)0.50.60.70.80.9Area Under the Curve 
(AUC)
AUC On Held-out Test Set 
 Over 10-Fold Cross Validation
Average AUC (Fragility) (b)
FragilityBetaAlphaGammaTheta
Alpha-coh-centGamma-coh-centTheta-coh-centDelta
Beta-coh-centCorr-centHighgammaCorr-deg
Alpha-coh-degDelta-coh-cent Beta-coh-degGamma-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-centTheta-coh-deg Delta-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-deg
Feature 
(Sorted by Mean)0.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Precision 
(Positive Predictive Value)Precision On Held-out Test Set 
 Over 10-Fold Cross Validation
Average Precision (Fragility)
(c)
FragilityBetaAlphaThetaGammaDelta
Theta-coh-centHighgamma
Gamma-coh-centAlpha-coh-centBeta-coh-centDelta-coh-centCorr-cent
Beta-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-centTheta-coh-degGamma-coh-degAlpha-coh-degCorr-deg
Delta-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-deg
Feature Name0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.752.00Cohen's D 
(CS of S minus F)*Effect Size Difference Between
 Success vs Failed Outcomes on Test-Set (d)
FragilityBeta
Theta-coh-centThetaAlphaGammaDelta
Gamma-coh-centHighgammaAlpha-coh-centBeta-coh-centDelta-coh-centCorr-cent
Highgamma-coh-centBeta-coh-degTheta-coh-degAlpha-coh-degGamma-coh-degCorr-deg
Delta-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-deg
Feature Name10−2810−2410−2010−1610−1210−810−4100PValue 
(Mann-Whitney U-test)PValue of Hypothesis Test Between
Success vs Failed Outcomes on Test-Set
Figure 4: Area under the curve and average precision performance. Speciﬁc results for
neural fragility are marked in red for each of the panels (a-d). (a)Discrimination plot (measured
with AUC) shows the relative performance of benchmark feature representations compared to
that achieved with neural fragility. (b)A similar average-PR curve shows the relative positive
predictive value of all features compared with fragility. Average precision is the analagous area
under the curve for the PR curve. (c)A summary of the Cohen’s D eﬀect size measurements
between the success and failed outcome CS distributions across all features. The eﬀect size
of neural fragility is signiﬁcantly greater then that of the beta band (alpha = 0.05) (d)The
corresponding PValues of the eﬀect size diﬀerences between success and failed outcomes, computed
via the Mann-Whitney U-test.
2.5 Fragility correlates with clinical complexity and treatment out-
comes
Neural fragility correlates with treatment outcomes and clinical complexity. Successful outcomes
are deﬁned as seizure free at 12+ months post-op (Engel class I and ILAE scores of 1 and 2) and
failure outcomes are deﬁned as seizure recurrence (Engel classes 2-4) at 12+ months post-op. In
addition, we can categorize patients by their clinical complexity (CC) as follows: (1) lesional,
(2) focal temporal, (3) focal extratemporal, and (4) multi-focal (Figure 2) [46, 47]. We stratify
the distribution of the success probabilities based on Engel score and show a decreasing trend
in success probability as Engel score increases (Figure 5b). The eﬀect sizes when comparing
9. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
against Engel class I were 1.067 for Engel class II (P = 4.438e-50), 1.387 for Engel class III (P =
2.148e-69), and 1.800 for Engel class IV (P = 4.476e-74). Although the AUC indirectly implies
such a diﬀerence would exist between Engel score I (success) and Engel score II-IV (failures), it
is reassuring to see that the level of conﬁdence decreases as the severity of the failure increases;
Engel score IV patients experience no changes in their seizures, suggesting the true epileptic tissue
was not localized and resected, while Engel score II patients experience some changes, suggesting
there was portions of the true epileptic tissue that may have been resected. We also compare the
success probability distributions with respect to the ILAE score, which is another stratiﬁcation of
the surgical outcomes (Figure 5c). There is a similar trend as seen in the Engel score - as ILAE
score increases, the success probability decreases.
We also analyze the success probability with respect to clinical measures of the epilepsy
severity, such as the clinical complexity (CC) of the patient, which is a categorization of the
etiology of the disease. CC is determined by what type of seizures the patient exhibits rather
than the severity of the seizures after-surgery (for more details see Methods 6.2). CC is a factor
that can be determined before surgery and one we expect would correlate with failure rate. This
is because the higher the CC, the more diﬃcult localization of the SOZis and hence possibly the
more seizure recurrences after surgery. In Figure 5a, we observed that CC1 and CC2 (i.e., lesional
and temporal lobe) patients had a similar distribution of success probabilities (Cohen’s D = 0.020;
MW U-test PValue = 0.799; LQRT PValue = 0.76), while CC3 and CC4 had signiﬁcantly lower
distributions (CC3: [Cohen’s D = 0.779; MW U-test PValue = 2.808e-19; LQRT PValue = 0.00];
CC4: [Cohen’s D = 1.138; MW U-test PValue = 7.388e-26; LQRT PValue = 0.00]). This trend
is not optimized for directly in our discrimination task, but it aligns with clinical outcomes. CC1
and CC2 are comparable, which agrees with current data suggesting that lesional and temporal
lobe epilepsy have the highest rates of surgical success [55, 56, 57, 58]. Extratemporal (CC4)
and multi-focal (CC4) patients tend to have lower success rates due to insuﬃcient localizations
and thus the neural fragility conﬁdence in those SOZlocalizations should be low [55, 59, 60, 61].
Finally, we examine the success probability diﬀerences based on gender, handedness, onset age
and surgery age to show that there are no relevant diﬀerences (Supplemental Figure 19).
2.6 Fragility heatmaps are more interpretable than all other EEG fea-
ture maps
We can parse the RF model to determine important aspects of the spatiotemporal heatmap that
are important in predicting surgical outcome. To do so, we perform permutations on the heatmap
inputs to the RF models to measure their relative importances over space and time. We observed
that the AUC metric was aﬀected primarily by a combination of the highest (90th quantiles and
up) neural fragility values of both the SOZandSOZCcontacts (Figure 18). The SOZCneural
fragility as much as 10 seconds before seizure onset impacted the AUC as did neural fragility of
theSOZright at seizure onset. For both the SOZand theSOZCfragility distributions, the
80th quantile and below did not contribute to the predictive power. In diﬀerent patients across
diﬀerent clinical centers, the practice of marking seizure onset times can vary due to varying
methodologies [47]. As a result, in the SOZC, there was some variation in terms of which time
point in the heatmap mattered most.
Although strong predictive capabilities of an EEG marker of the SOZare necessary, it is also
important that the marker be presented in an interpretable manner to clinicians. We next show
how fragility heatmaps are the most interpretable over all baseline features. In Figure 6a, there
are two heatmaps computed for the same seizure event in Patient_01: one is a beta band map
(left) and one is a neural fragility map (right). Both maps are normalized across channels and
both are computed with similar sliding windows (full details in Online Methods). However, it is
10. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)
1 2 3 4
CC (1-4)0.00.10.20.30.40.5Probability of SuccessPredicted Success Probability
 Stratified by Clinical Complexity (b)
1 2 3 4
ENGEL (1-4)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Probability of SuccessPredicted Success Probability
 Stratified by ENGEL Score (c)
1 2 3 4 5 6
ILAE (1-6)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Probability of SuccessPredicted Success Probability
 Stratified by ILAE Score
Figure 5: Neural fragility of patients stratiﬁed by clinical covariates. (a) Distribution
of success probability values per patient stratiﬁed by clinical complexity (CC; see Methods 6.2),
where lesional (1) and temporal lobe epilepsy (2) patients have similar distributions because they
are generally the "easier" patients to treat, whereas extratemporal (3) and multi-focal (4) have
lower general probabilities because they are "harder" patients to treat. (b)The distribution
of the probability values per patient stratiﬁed by Engel score. Due to the AUC being high for
fragility, it is expected that Engel I has high CS, while Engel II-IV have lower success probability.
However, the relative downward trend in the success probabilities from Engel II-IV indicated that
neural fragility is present in the clinical SOZin varying degrees from Engel II-IV. This suggests
that it correlates with the underlying severity of failed outcomes. (c)A similar distribution for
another measure of surgical outcome, the ILAE score, where 1 are considered success and 2-6 are
considered failure.
clear that less contacts "stand-out" as pathological in the beta-band heatmap before seizure onset,
with the majority of the map being diﬀerent shades of blue. In contrast, in the fragility heatmap,
one contact ( ATT1from Figure 3) is fragile the entire duration before seizure onset (solid white
line), and then it is clear that a few more contacts become fragile after the electrographic onset
of the seizure. These fragile areas that "pop-out" in the heat-map as red-hot areas occur in the
clinically annotated SOZ and this patient had a successful surgery.
To quantify interpretability, we compute an interpretability ratio: the ratio of the feature
values in the 90th quantile between the SOZand theSOZCover the section of data used by
the feature’s RF model. This measures the contrast that one sees between the extreme values in
theSOZversus the extreme values they see in the SOZC. The larger the ratio, then the more
contrast the map will have. In Figure 6b, we show that the eﬀect size diﬀerence between successful
and failed outcome of this interpretability ratio is largest in neural fragility when compared to
all baseline features. It is well-known that RF models are scale-invariant [52], so it is plausible
that there are portions of heatmaps that distinguish one channel from another and that can
be parsed out via a decision tree and not the naked eye, which leads to high AUC in the beta
band representation in Figure 4. For example a decision tree can discriminate between 0.30000
and 0.2995, which on a normalized color-scale is diﬃcult to parse by visual inspection. Neural
fragility on the other hand, shows marked diﬀerences between the clinically annotated SOZ(red
electrodes on the y-axis) and the actual fragility values even before seizure onset.
3 Discussion
We demonstrate that neural fragility, a networked-dynamical systems based representation of
iEEG is a strong candidate for a highly interpretable iEEG ﬁngerprint of the SOZ. We compared
11. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)
G1G2G3G4G7G8G9G10G13G14G15G16G17G18G19G20G21G22G23G11G12G24G25G26G27G28G29G30G31G32A771A772A773A774A775A776A777A7783L713L723L733L743L753L76A671A672A673A6743671367236733674AD1AD2AD3AD43D13D23D33D46F16F26F36F46F56F6IF1IF2IF3IF4IF5IF6IL71IL72IL73IL740L710L720L730L746L716L726L736L74
0.00.20.40.60.8Relative beta PRwer
EEG Onset
G1G2G3G4G7G8G9G10G13G14G15G16G17G18G19G20G21G22G23G11G12G24G25G26G27G28G29G30G31G32A771A772A773A774A775A776A777A7783L713L723L733L743L753L76A671A672A673A6743671367236733674AD1AD2AD3AD43D13D23D33D46F16F26F36F46F56F6IF1IF2IF3IF4IF5IF6IL71IL72IL73IL740L710L720L730L746L716L726L736L74
0.00.20.40.60.8Fragility
EEG Onset
(b)
Theta-coh-degDelta-coh-deg
Gamma-coh-degCorr-cent
Beta-coh-degAlpha-coh-deg
Highgamma-coh-centHighgamma-coh-degHighgammaCorr-deg
Beta-coh-centDelta-coh-centDelta
Gamma
Alpha-coh-centTheta
Gamma-coh-centAlpha
Theta-coh-centBeta
Fragility
Feature 
 (Ordered by Mean)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Absolute Effect Size 
(Cohen's D)*Interpretability Ratios of Features 
Stratified By Surgical Outcomes
Figure
6:Interpretability ratio of feature heatmaps. (a) Two heatmap examples of a
seizure snapshot of Patient_01 (Treated at NIH, ECoG, CC1, Engel I, ILAE 1) with the beta
frequency band (left) and the neural fragility heatmap (right). Both colormaps show the relative
feature value normalized across channels over time. The black line denotes electrographic seizure
onset.(b)A bar plot of the interpretability ratio that is deﬁned in Results Section 2.6 computed
for every feature. The y-axis shows an eﬀect size diﬀerence between the interpretability ratios
of success and failed outcomes. The interpretability ratio for each patient’s heatmap is deﬁned
as the ratio between the feature values in the two electrode sets (SOZ
S
OZC). Neural fragility is
signiﬁcantly greater then the beta band (alpha level=0.05). The black bars denote 1 std.
12. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
neural fragility to 20 other popular features using data from 91 patients treated across ﬁve centers
with varying clinical complexity. Neural fragility performed the best in terms of AUC, PR and
interpretability. This is the ﬁrst study to our knowledge that benchmarks proposed iEEG features
in a uniform fashion over the same sets of patients using the best possible parameters of a RF
model to compute a conﬁdence measure (i.e. probability of success) of the clinically annotated
SOZ. To facilitate reproducibility and further investigation of iEEG features, we made this
dataset BIDS-compliant and publicly available through the OpenNeuro website (for details see
Methods 6.1).
Challenges in validating iEEG features as SOZ markers Many features have been
proposed as potential biomarkers for the SOZ, but none have successfully translated into the
clinical workﬂow [27, 26, 28, 62, 63, 55, 31]. Current limitations for evaluating computational
approaches to localization can be largely attributed to i) the lack of ground-truth labels for
the true underlying SOZ (it cannot be observed in practice because there is no biomarker), ii)
insuﬃcient benchmarking to other iEEG features and iii) a lack in suﬃcient sampling across
epilepsy etiologies.
Since there is no ground truth to drive algorithmic development, one can instead look for
features that correlate with clinicians when stratiﬁed by outcome measures. Our approach sees
if the feature values of the clinically annotated SOZ are "high" in success patients and "low"
in failed patients. More rigorously we use feature values of SOZandSOZCto predict surgical
outcomes, which is a good approach since we lack ground truth labels of our desired variable.
Note that developing algorithms to directly predict the SOZwill at best replicate what the
current standard practice is, and achieve a rate of 30-70% surgical success rate [27, 26, 28, 62,
63]. In addition, electrodes within the SOZmay not be a part of the true EZ, but are annotated
because of their "appearance" to be the onset of seizures. At best, it can be assumed that in
successful surgical outcomes, the EZ is an unknown subset of the SOZand resected zone. Hence
one desires a feature that has relatively high conﬁdence in the clinically annotated SOZin success
outcomes compared to failed outcomes.
Even with a seemingly successful feature derived from data, it is important to benchmark
against existing approaches to provide a holistic view of the value of the said feature. Without
benchmarking, it is easy to become overly optimistic in terms of the performance of a feature,
whereas it may very well be that other iEEG features perform just as well. In this study, we
benchmark neural fragility against 20 other proposed features. While other traditional features
such as the power in the beta band seem to be informative in SOZlocalization [64], neural
fragility outperforms in eﬀect size, p-value and interpretability.
Although predicting surgical outcomes in our experimental setup is promising, it will be
important to understand why certain localizations are successful and why certain are insuﬃcient.
If neural fragility is a good marker, then we expect successful outcomes to have high fragility in
their clinically annotated SOZ, and lower fragility in the SOZC, which is shown in this study.
Understanding failed localizations and why they failed becomes more diﬃcult. For example, in
patients with lesions on MRI scans that correlate with the patient’s EEG and seizure semiology,
surgical resection can lead to seizure freedom in approximately 70% of patients [47]. Even
in these relatively straightforward cases, localization is not perfect, possibly due to chronic
eﬀects of epilepsy such as kindling, which can cause neighboring tissue to become abnormal and
epileptogenic [65, 66]. This is why there is a need to sample a heterogeneous and large patient
population and derive a feature is invariant on average to epilepsy type and clinical covariates.
In this study, we spent over four years to successfully collect and annotate this heterogeneous
dataset of 91 patients.
13. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Limitations of the most popular iEEG features A google scholar search using the key-
words: "localization of seizure onset zone epilepsy intracranial EEG" produces over 24,000 results.
This is striking considering no computational tools to assist in SOZ localization are in the clinical
workﬂow today. The majority of proposed features lack consistency in ﬁnding objective iEEG
quantities that correlate to clinically annotated SOZ because they fail to capture internal proper-
ties of the iEEG network which are critical to understand when looking for the SOZ. Proposed
algorithms either (i) compute EEG features from individual channels (e.g. spectral power in a
given frequency band), thus ignoring dependencies between channels [23, 67, 68, 20, 19, 22, 21]
to name a few, or they (ii) apply network-based measures to capture pairwise dependencies in
the EEG window of interest. Speciﬁcally, correlation or coherence between each pair of EEG
channels is computed and organized into an adjacency matrix, on which summary statistics are
derived including degree distribution and variants of centrality [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 34,
25, 33]. Such network-based measures are not based on well formulated hypotheses of the role of
the epileptic tissue in the iEEG network, and many diﬀerent networks (adjacency matrices) can
have identical summary statistics [69] resulting in ambiguous interpretations of such measures.
A popular EEG feature that has been proposed as an iEEG marker of the SOZ and reported
in over 1000 published studies is High-frequency oscillations (HFOs) ([70, 23, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75,
76, 71, 77, 74, 78, 79, 72, 80, 81, 82, 83, 62, 63, 84] to name a few). HFOs are spontaneous
events occurring on individual EEG channels that distinctively stand out from the background
signal and are divided into three categories: ripples (80–250 Hz), fast ripples (250–500 Hz), and
very-fast ripples (>500 Hz) [85, 74, 86]. Regarding epilepsy, retrospective studies suggested
that resected brain regions that generate high rates of HFOs may lead to good post-surgical
outcome (e.g., [87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 49, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97]). A 2015 reported meta-analysis
investigated whether patients with high HFO-generating areas that had been resected presented a
better post-surgical seizure outcome in comparison to patients in whom those areas had not been
resected [98]. Although they found signiﬁcant eﬀects for resected areas that either presented a
high number of ripples or fast ripples, eﬀect sizes were small and only a few studies fulﬁlled their
selection criteria [98]. Furthermore, several studies have also questioned the reproducibility and
reliability of HFOs as a marker [99, 97, 100, 101, 72, 102] and note that there are also physiologic,
non-epileptic HFOs. Their existence poses a challenge, as disentangling them from clinically
relevant pathological HFOs still is an unsolved issue [103, 104, 105, 106, 107].
Similar inconclusive results hold in completed prospective studies of HFOs. In 2017, an
updated Cochrane review by Gloss et al. [108] investigated the clinical value of HFOs regarding
decision making in epilepsy surgery. They identiﬁed only two prospective studies at the time
and concluded that there is not enough evidence so far to allow for any reliable conclusions
regarding the clinical value of HFOs as a marker for the SOZ. Today, ﬁve clinical trials are
listed as using HFOs for surgical planning on clinicaltrials.gov as either recruiting, enrolling by
invitation, or active and not enrolling and none have reported results. The fundamental limitation
of the aforementioned studies lies in the fact that they approach the SOZ EEG marker discovery
process as a signal processing and pattern recognition problem, concentrating on processing
EEG observations to ﬁnd events of interest (e.g., HFOs) as opposed to understanding how the
observations were generated in the ﬁrst place and how speciﬁc internal network properties can
trigger seizures.
Why Neural Fragility Performs Well Rather than analyzing iEEG data at the channel and
signal processing level, we seek to model the underlying network dynamics that might give rise
to seizures in the form of neural fragility in a dynamical network model. A notion of fragility
in networks is commonly seen in analysis of structural [109], economic [110] and even social
networks [111]. Although we are not directly analyzing the structural nature of neuronal network,
14. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
there are studies that have characterized epilepsy in terms of structural fragility and network
organization [112, 38]. Speciﬁcally, in cellular studies [113, 114], epilepsy is caused by changes, or
"perturbations" in the structural network (i.e. chandelier cell loss, or abnormal axonal sprouting
from layer V pyramidal cells), which causes loss of inhibition or excessive excitation respectively;
these biological changes cause downstream aberrant electrical ﬁring (i.e. seizures). In this study,
we analyze a functional network, characterized by a dynamical system derived from the iEEG
recordings. Each electrode’s eﬀect on the rest of the network is captured by a time-varying linear
model that we proposed in [37]. Each node is an electrode, which is recording aggregate neuronal
activity within a brain region. By quantifying the fragility of each node, we determine how much
of a change in that region’s functional connections is necessary to cause seizure-like phenomena
(e.g. instability). As a result, high neural fragility is hypothesized to coincide with a region that
is sensitive to minute perturbations, causing unstable phenomena in the entire network (i.e. a
seizure).
Presenting neural fragility as spatiotemporal heatmaps allows clinicians to qualitatively assess
which electrodes and time points are most fragile within an iEEG network, aggregating any existing
data sources (e.g. MRI, neuropsych evaluations, etc.) to formulate a localization hypothessis. By
analyzing the fragility heatmaps of patients retrospectively, we conclude that i) fragility is high in
electrodes present in the SOZwhen the patient’s surgery resulted in seizure freedom (i.e. Engel
class I) and ii) high fragility is present in electrodes present outside the SOZwhen the patient’s
surgery resulted in seizure recurrence (i.e. Engel class II-IV). In the context of fragility theory of
a network, seizure recurrence can be due to perturbations of highly fragile regions in the epileptic
network that were left untreated. Importantly, fragility of an electrode within a certain window
does not correlate directly with gamma or high-gamma power, which are traditional frequency
bands of interest for localizing the SOZ(Supplementary Figure 20) [28, 42, 21, 115, 49, 116, 80,
27]. This implies that neural fragility presents independent information on top of what clinicians
look for in iEEG data. If translated into the clinic, neural fragility can serve as an additional
source of information that clinicians can utilize for localization.
ScientiﬁcandTechnologicalAdvancesEmergingfromNeuralFragility Neuralfragility
has the potential to re-deﬁne how epilepsy surgery is performed, departing from the classical
“localization paradigms” and “en-bloc resections” to a personalized “network-based” user-friendly
visualization and surgical strategy. By developing a novel 3D (brain region, time, fragility)
network-based method for anatomical representation of the epileptiform activity, including the
seizure onset areas and the early propagation zone, this study will have high impact with the
potential to oﬀer a safer, more eﬃcient, and cost-eﬀective treatment option for a highly challenging
group of patients with disabling DRE. More precise SOZ localization using neural fragility would
also guide of chronic implantation of neurostimulation devices aimed to suppress seizures with
bursts of current when detected [117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124].
Neural fragility may also be relevant in detecting epileptogenic regions in the brain when
applied to interictal (between seizures) iEEG recordings. Ictal or seizure iEEG data are currently
the gold standard in clinical practice for localizing the SOZ[47, 46]. However, having patients
with electrodes implanted for long periods of time, and requiring the monitoring of multiple
seizure events over many weeks carries the risk of infection, sudden death, trauma and cognitive
deﬁcits from having repeated seizures. This contributes to the large cost of epilepsy monitoring [1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 15]. If a candidate iEEG marker could be found that is able to provide strong localizing
evidence using only interictal data, then it would signiﬁcantly reduce invasive monitoring time
[112].
Neural fragility is an EEG marker that can also further advance our knowledge of neural
mechanisms of seizure generation that will then drive more eﬀective interventions. For example,
15. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
fragility can be used to identify pathological tissue that can be removed and tested in vitro for
abnormal histopathological structure [113, 114]. Knowledge of structural abnormalities may
inform new targeted drug treatments.
Finally, neural fragility may have broader implications in understanding how underlying brain
network dynamics change during intervention (e.g. drugs or electrical stimulation). This could
have large implications in assessing eﬃcacy of drugs on all patients with epilepsy (i.e., not just
patients with MRE), as well as multiple other neurological disorders including Alzheimher’s
disease or the spectrum of dementias.
16. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 Materials and Methods
4.1 Study Design
The aim of the presented study is to test the hypothesis that neural fragility is a robust feature
representation of the SOZ in functional iEEG networks for DRE patients. To explore this aim we
collected retrospective iEEG data from n=91 DRE patients who underwent intracranial EEG
monitoring, which included either electrocorticography (ECoG), or depth electrodes with stereo-
EEG (SEEG). Patients were selected from University of Maryland Medical Center (UMMC),
University of Miami Jackson Memorial Hospital (UMH), National Institute of Health (NIH), Johns
Hopkins Hospital (JHH), and the Cleveland Clinic (CClinic). Patients exhibiting the following
criteria were excluded: no seizures recorded, pregnant patients, EEG sampling rate less than
250 Hz, previous surgeries more then 6 months before the current implantation, and no surgery
was performed. Subjects were grouped on the basis of their epilepsy clinical complexity (1-4),
surgical outcome (S/F), Engel score (I-IV) and ILAE score (1-6). The non-clinical investigators
were blinded to data collection. Every patient’s SOZwas labeled by 1-3 trained epileptologists
(depending on the center). The corresponding SOZcomplement that we deﬁne, or SOZC, are
the electrodes that are not part of the SOZ. Surgery was performed on the basis of the clinically
annotatedSOZand subjects were followed for 12+ months to determine treatment outcome. For
full details of patients, see the Supplementary section.
4.2 Neural Fragility
All iEEG data is preprocessed in the same manner as in [36]. For full details on preprocessing,
see the Supplementary details.
To compute fragility heatmaps from iEEG recordings, we constructed a simple linear model for
each 250 ms iEEG window. We used a sparse least-squares with a 10e-5 l2-norm regularization to
ensure that the model identiﬁed was stable as in [37, 36]. Then, we slid the window 125 ms and
repeated the process, generating a sequence of linear network models in time. We systematically
computed the minimum perturbation required for each electrode’s connections (for details see
Supplemental Figure 8b) to produce instability for the entire network as described in [36]. The
electrodes that were the most fragile were hypothesized to be related to the SOZ in these epilepsy
networks (seen as the dark-red color in the turbo colormap in Figure 3).
We also compute time-varying features that can be computed from small windows of iEEG
data to serve as a benchmark against neural fragility. This includes spectral power in frequency
bands, eigenvector centrality of correlation and coherence matrices and in-degree of correlation
and coherence matrices, resulting in 20 benchmark features. For full details on computing the
benchmark features, see Supplementary section.
4.3 Statistical Analyses
Results and graphs are shown as means +/- std. Statistical analysis was performed using Python
and a suite of open-source libraries.
To determine the eﬃcacy of neural fragility over other benchmark features, we propose a
10-fold cross-validation (CV) experiment on a ﬁxed set of subjects with varying epilepsies. A
structured RF statistical model was built using Python. We select a window of 10 seconds before
marked seizure onset until the ﬁrst 5% of the seizure. Each feature heatmap was structured into
a set of quantile features of the SOZandSOZCset over time resulting in a 20-dimensional
vector over the considered window. Our driving hypothesis is that SOZfeature values should be
diﬀerent from the feature values of the SOZCin successfully treated patients. For each fold of
17. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the CV experiment, patients are split into a training, validation and held-out test set. Parameters
of the RF are trained over the training patients, and hyperparameters are optimized on the
validation set. All performance metrics are reported on the held-out test set. The RF model
outputs a predicted probability of success per patient. Area under the curve (AUC), and average
precision are measured along with the predicted probability of success scores per patient.
Eﬀect sizes are computed using Cohen’s D. PValues are computed using the Mann-Whitney U
tests for unpaired data, and paired Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for paired data [125]. We corrected
for any multiple comparisons using the Holm-Bonferroni step-down method [126]. In some cases,
we also present Welch’s t-test and the Likelihood Q-ratio test (LQRT) results to show that the
results are robust to statistical test chosen. For full details and motivations of each step in our
statistical analyses, see Supplementary section.
18. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5 Supplementary Material
Raw data is present in the link in Section 6.2. Any supplementary Information and Source Data
ﬁles are available in the online version of the paper.
5.1 Dataset and deﬁnition elaborations
Clinical Center Patients
Clinical Covariate NIHJHHUMMC UMHCClinic Total
Number Patients 144 7 5 61 91
Number Success 91 7 3 24 44
Number Failure 53 0 2 37 47
Number Male 6n/a 7 1 30 44
Number Female 8n/a 0 4 31 43
Table 1: A table of number of patients per clinical center (NIH = National Institute of Health;
JHH = Johns Hopkins Hospital; UMMC = University of Maryland Medical Center; UMH =
University of Miami Jackson Memorial Hospital; CClinic = Cleveland Clinic). Includes number
of success, failures, and gender per group. Note that JHH did not retain gender information for
these group of patients.
19. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
EEG SIGNATURESEEG DATA PROCESSINGECoGSEEG
CLINICAL 𝑺𝑶𝒁HYPOTHESISSURGERYResectionAblation
seizure recurring (Engel 2-4)seizure free (Engel 1)
OUTCOMEFigure 7: After non-invasive analysis is inconclusive, a complex and relatively lengthy iEEG
workﬂow for localization takes place. During invasive monitoring, clinicians identify the clinically
hypothesized SOZas the electrodes with the earliest visually identiﬁable EEG signatures at
seizure onset (see [47] for a review of this process). Note it is impossible to observe the EZ directly,
so clinicians are required to estimate where to place iEEG electrodes and then successfully interpret
the network patterns and raw iEEG patterns (e.g. HFOs, or spiking activity) to formulate the
clinicalSOZhypothesis. An estimate of the true EZ is then created using a combination of
the clinical SOZhypothesis, as well non-invasive ﬁndings. When possible, subsequent surgical
resection or laser ablation, generally including the SOZalong with a variable extent of additional
tissue, is performed. Post-operatively, patients are followed for 12+ months and categorized as
either success, or failure as deﬁned in Section 6.2. This translates to clinical outcomes measured
by Engel score, or ILAE score. As a result of seizure freedom, one can assume that the clinical
SOZincluded the EZ in some manner. In contrast, if seizures continue, then the clinical SOZ
was not suﬃcient to cover the EZ.
5.2 Benchmark analysis
20. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
TimeElectrodesSPATIOTEMPORAL FEATURE MAPSCANDIDATE SOZ FEATURES (n=21)EEG PROCESSINGOUTCOME PREDICTION𝑷(𝑺=𝒔𝒖𝒄𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔)	=𝒇𝜽,	(𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁,𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑪)P(S) DISTRIBUTIONS
01SUCCESSFAILUREP(S)
•Nodal Fragility (n=1)•Frequency (n=6)•Graph Metrics (n=14)
(Ideal)
ACTUAL OUTCOMES(a)
ONE EEG SNAPSHOTEEG Windows
N ElectrodesTimeNETWORK MODEL(𝐴	+D𝒊)	𝑢𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒D	-NODAL FRAGILITYSPATIOTEMPORAL FEATURE (F) MAPA||D𝟏||. . .D𝟏D𝑵||D𝑵||
𝒙𝟏𝒙𝟐𝒙𝟑𝑨𝟑𝟐𝒙𝟑(𝑡+1)𝒙𝟐𝑡𝑨𝟑𝟐. . .D𝒊||D𝒊||. . .. . .
...𝑊$𝑊%𝑊$𝑊%𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑪N Electrodes
(b)
Figure 8: Computational experiment setup for all candidate SOZfeatures and statistical analysis.
(a)Any candidate feature that can produce a spatiotemporal heatmap was computed from EEG
data and then partitioned by the clinically annotated SOZset and the complement, SOZC
(i.e. non-SOZelectrodes) to compute a conﬁdence statistic measuring the feature’s belief of the
clinician’s hypothesis. Here FSOZandFSOZCwere the feature values within their respective sets.
fis the function depending on the Random Forest model parameters, that maps the statistics
of theFSOZandFSOZCto a conﬁdence statistic. An ideal feature would have high and low
conﬁdence for success and failed outcomes respectively. Each point on the ﬁnal CS distribution
comparisons represent one patient. (b)A more detailed schematic of how our proposed fragility
and baseline features were computed from EEG data for a single snapshot of EEG data. See
fragility methods section for description of x, Aand. For a similar schematic of how the
baseline features were computed, see Supplemental ﬁgure 10.
21. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
M F N/A
Gender0.09.118.227.336.445.554.663.772.881.991.0
count49.5%46.2%
4.4%
0102030405060708090100Frequency [%]Distribution of Genders (n=91)(a)
N/A R L
Handedness0.09.118.227.336.445.554.663.772.881.991.0
count
11.0%75.8%
13.2%
0102030405060708090100Frequency [%]Distribution of Handedness (n=91) (b)
CC1 CC2 CC3 CC4
Clinical Complexity0.09.118.227.336.445.554.663.772.881.991.0
count
26.4%29.7%
25.3%
18.7%
0102030405060708090100Frequency [%]Distribution of Epilepsy Types (n=91)
(c)
ENG1 ENG2 ENG3 ENG4
Engel Class0.09.118.227.336.445.554.663.772.881.991.0
count48.4%
22.0%
13.2%16.5%
0102030405060708090100Frequency [%]Distribution of Engel Classes (n=91) (d)
Figure 9: Distributions of the 91 patient dataset based on a variety of clinical factors, such
as gender (a), handedness (b), clinical complexity (c), and Engel class (d). The plots show
distributions over the 91 patients used in analysis.
ONE EEG SNAPSHOTBASELINE FEATURESSPATIOTEMPORAL HEATMAP
SPECTRAL POWERGRAPHMETRICSN Electrodes
N Electrodes𝑊!𝑊"𝑊"𝑊!𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑭𝑺𝑶𝒁𝑪Time
EEG Windows
...
Figure 10: An accompanying schematic for Figure 8, describing how we processed baseline
features, such as spectral power, and graph metrics. The feature heatmap processing is exactly
the same as fragility, allowing us to compare the feature representations of neural fragility, spectral
power and graph metrics of correlation and coherence derived graphs for the purposes of SOZ
localization.
22. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5.3 Neural fragility of a network
EI-1-13-3𝑥!(𝑡+1)𝑥"(𝑡+1)=−13−3−1	𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)𝑥!(𝑡+1)𝑥"(𝑡+1)=−1+13−3+2−1	𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)𝑥!(𝑡+1)𝑥"(𝑡+1)=−1+23−3+2−1	𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)EEG modelTwo node networkEI-1-1+13-3 +2EI-1-1+23-3 +2DNorm = |∆|0𝟓𝟖=fragility of node I𝑥𝑡+1=𝐴𝑥(𝑡)
𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)Time (A.U.)𝒙𝑡+1=(𝐀+𝚫𝟏)𝒙(𝑡)𝒙𝑡+1=(𝐀+𝚫𝟐)𝒙(𝑡)
𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)Time (A.U.)
𝑥!(𝑡)𝑥"(𝑡)Time (A.U.)seizure!(a)(b)(c)EEG responses to impulse at node I
Figure 11: To build quantitative intuition on what neural fragility means in the context of a
dynamical iEEG system, we construct a 2-node EEG network example with an excitatory (E ) and
inhibitory (I ) population of neurons. For a qualitative description, see Figure 1. xI(t)andxE(t)
are the EEG activity of the Iand E neuronal population respectively. ’ A’ is a linear network
model quantifying how each population aﬀects the rest over time. (i.e. the fragility), is the
amount of change added to a node’s connections. The fragility of the node is quantiﬁed as the
minimal amount of change necessary to cause seizure-like phenomena. (a)shows a stable network
without a perturbation added, such that the network responses due to an impulse at Iresult in a
transient that reverts to baseline. (b)shows a perturbation added, but the network is still stable
with a slightly larger transient when an impulse is applied to node I. Then(c)shows enough of a
perturbation is added, such that the network becomes unstable; an impulse applied at node I
results in oscillatory activity that does not quickly return to baseline. The magnitude of the 
added in(c)is the fragility of node I.
23. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)(b)(c)Failed SurgeryNo SurgerySuccessfulSurgeryFigure 12: Pooled fragility distribution analysis for all 91 patients: failed (a), no surgery (b) and
successful surgery (c) datasets. Each SOZ(soz in blue bars) and SOZC(’nsoz’ in orange bars)
distribution per patient was bootstrap sampled (see Methods section for more information on
sampling) and then compared using the one-sided Mann-Whitney U test. The corresponding test
yielded a statistic of 2776334 (PValue = 0.355) for the failed patient outcomes and a statistic
of 36836739 (PValue = 3.326e-70) for the successful patient outcomes. The patients without
resection were not included in the analysis comparing to outcome, but these patients can present
as interesting case studies where the SOZ was hypothetically localizable, but perhaps was too
close to eloquent areas.
24. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5.4 Pooled subject and SOZvsSOZCanalysis
25. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_1 (S Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_1 (S Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_1 (S Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_1 (S Outcome)
SOZ (mean +/- std)
SOZC (mean +/- std)
EEG SZ Onset
(b)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_26 (F Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_26 (F Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_26 (F Outcome)
SOZ (mean +/- std)
SOZC (mean +/- std)
EEG SZ Onset (c)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_40 (F Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_40 (F Outcome)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (A.U.)0.00.20.40.60.81.0FragilityPatient_40 (F Outcome)
SOZ (mean +/- std)
SOZC (mean +/- std)
EEG SZ Onset
Figure 13: RedSOZvs blackSOZCsignals for patients presented in Figure 3: Patient_01 (a),
Patient_26 (b), Patient_40 (c). For each patient, the ictal snapshots available are visualized
around seizure onset with 5 seconds before onset until the ﬁrst 20% of the seizure. Note that not
necessarily all electrodes in the clinically annotated SOZare part of the EZ when the patient had
a successful outcome. Therefore, if neural fragility had value in contrasting true EZ electrodes
from non-EZ electrodes, then any extra electrodes clinically annotated in the SOZshould have
relative lower fragility.
26. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8
020 40 60 80100 120 140 160
Time (A.U.)0.20.40.60.8(a)Successful
outcomes pooled.(b)Failed outcomes pooled.
Figure 14: RedSOZvs blackSOZCfragility signals for pooled patients within each of the ﬁve
centers with successful (a)and failed outcomes (b)for NIH (n=14), JHH (n=4), CC (n=61),
UMH (n=5), and UMMC (n=7) (top to bottom respectively). Note UMMC only had successful
outcomes, so there was no curve for the failures. Seizure periods were resampled and normalized
to 100 samples for averaging and viewing purposes. In JHH and UMH, there were only one and
two patients in successful outcomes respectively.27. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5.5 Results and interpretations
28. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Seizure Onset
Patient_01
31302928272625242322212019181716151413121110987654321
12341234564321123456
1234SFIFG
ILTMLTSLTPLTATTASTADPD32
876321541234123443211234564321PSTPatient_1ADPD
ATT1
ATT2
AD1
AD2
AD3
AD4
PD1
PD2
PD3
PD4
ATT3
ATT4
ATT5
ATT6
ATT7
ATT8
PLT5
PLT6
AST1
AST2
AST3
AST4
PST1
PST2
PST3
PST4
SLT1
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
G7
G8
G9
G10
G13
G14
G15
G16
G17
G18
G19
G20
G21
G22
G23
G11
G12
G24
G25
G26
G27
G28
G29
G30
G31
G32
PLT1
PLT2
PLT3
PLT4
SF1
SF2
SF3
SF4
SF5
SF6
IF1
IF2
IF3
IF4
IF5
IF6
ILT1
ILT2
ILT3
ILT4
MLT1
MLT2
MLT3
MLT4
SLT2
SLT3
SLT4
43214321123456PBTMBTABTRTGRHDRADPatient_2691011121314151612345678312426272829302523181920212217323934353637383340474243444546414855505152535449566358596061625764
RAD1
RAD2
RAD3
RAD4
RAD5
RAD6
RAD7
RHD1
RHD2
RHD3
RHD4
RHD5
RHD6
RHD7
RHD8
RHD9
RTG40
RTG48
RTG41
RTG42
RTG43
RTG44
RTG49
RTG50
RTG51
RTG52
RTG57
RTG58
RTG59
RTG60
ABT1
ABT2
ABT3
ABT4
MBT1
MBT2
MBT3
MBT4
PBT3
PBT4
PBT1
PBT2
RTG1
RTG2
RTG3
RTG4
RTG5
RTG6
RTG7
RTG8
RTG9
RTG10
RTG11
RTG12
RTG13
RTG14
RTG15
RTG16
RTG17
RTG19
RTG20
RTG23
RTG24
RTG25
RTG27
RTG28
RTG29
RTG30
RTG31
RTG32
RTG33
RTG34
RTG35
RTG36
RTG37
RTG38
RTG39
RTG45
RTG46
RTG47
RTG53
RTG54
RTG55
RTG56
RTG61
RTG62
RTG63
RTG64
BQ
B’C’E’F’O’X’P’U’T’R’N’M’
Q2Patient_40(a)
Q2
Q1
Q6
Q7
Q8
B1
B2
B3
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
P'1
P'2
P'4
P'5
P'6
P'7
X'1
X'2
X'7
X'8
X'9
U'1
U'2
U'3
U'4
U'5
U'6
U'7
U'8
C'6
C'7
C'8
C'9
O'1
O'2
O'3
O'7
O'8
O'9
F'1
F'2
F'3
F'4
F'5
F'8
F'9
F'10
T'1
T'2
T'3
T'4
B'1
B'2
B'3
B'6
B'7
B'8
B'9
E'1
E'2
E'3
E'4
E'5
E'6
E'7
E'8
R'4
R'5
R'6
R'7
R'8
M'1
M'2
M'4
M'5
M'6
M'7
M'8
N'1
N'2
N'3
N'4
N'5
N'6
N'7(b)
Figure
15:Fragility heatmaps with electrodes on y-axis and time on x-axis with the dashed
white-lines denoting seizure onset and oﬀset. Shows a period of 30 seconds before seizure onset and
30 seconds after seizure oﬀset. (a)Shows clinically annotated maps of the implanted ECoG/SEEG
electrodes with red denoting SOZ contacts. (b)shows spatiotemporal fragility heatmaps for
example of successful outcome (Patient_01), and failed outcome (Patient_26 and Patient_40).
The color scale represents the amplitude of the normalized fragility metric, with closer to 1
denoting fragile regions and closer to 0 denoting relatively stable regions. The contacts in red
and orange are part of the SOZ and RZ, respectively as deﬁned in Methods section. Note that
the red contacts are also part of the RZ. Visualized with Turbo continuous colormap. Best seen
if viewed in color.
29. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean Confidence Statistic of Success Predicted0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction of Success Outcomes
Calibration Plot of Fragility (reliability curve)
Perfectly calibrated
Fragility (0.162 ± 0.036Figure 16: Calibration curve showing the fraction of actual successful surgical outcomes on the
y-axis vs the average CS output on the x-axis. This curve measures how calibrated the predicted
success probability values are to the true risk stratiﬁcation of the patient population. The closer
a curve is to the y=xline, then the more calibrated a model is. It is quantiﬁed by the Brier-loss
(closer to 0 is better), which is shown in the legend, and is signiﬁcantly lower then the next best
feature (an improvement of 15%).
30. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
1-Specificity
(Predicted Success Incorrectly)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Sensitivity
(Predicted Success Correctly)Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve of 
Fragility & Top-3 Baseline Features
fragility (AUC = 0.88 ± 0.064)
beta (AUC = 0.82 ± 0.040)
alpha (AUC = 0.80 ± 0.060)
gamma (AUC = 0.80 ± 0.057)
Clinical Operating Point (b)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Sensitivity
(Predicted Success Correctly)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Positive Predictive Value 
(TP
TP+FP)Average Precision Recall Curve
fragility (AP=0.83 ± 0.076)
beta (AP=0.79 ± 0.083)
alpha (AP=0.74 ± 0.102)
gamma (AP=0.73 ± 0.070)
(c)
Fragility
N = 10Beta
N = 100.750.800.850.900.95AUC
Beta
minus
Fragility−2−101
Paired
cohen's d
Figure 17: (a)The ROC curve over 10 folds of cross-validation of the held-out test set obtained by
applying a Random Forest model onto the spatiotemporal heatmaps to predict surgical outcome
(See 4 Section). Fragility and the top-3 baseline features in terms of AUC are visualized. The
shaded area represents the standard deviation of the curve obtained by linear interpolation for
visualization purposes. The AUC of fragility obtained a 0.88 +/- 0.064 over the 10 standard
deviation with a relative improvement of 7.2% improvement in AUC compared to the next best
feature representation (i.e. the beta frequency band). At the Youden point (stars), neural fragility
obtains a balanced accuracy score of 0.76 +/- 0.06, and an improvement of 0.32 in TPR and 0.32
in FPR compared to the clinical operating point (red star). (c)A paired estimation plot showing
how the same test set of patients diﬀered in AUC depending on whether it was using the fragility,
or beta feature heatmap representation. The paired Cohen’s D eﬀect size was computed at -0.975
(-1.97 to -0.29; 95% CI). The p-values associated with the diﬀerence between Neural Fragility
and the Beta frequency band were 0.0204, 0.0273, and 0.0225 using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test,
permutation test, and the paired student t-test respectively. Comparing Fragility to all other
feature representations were more diﬀerent in terms of larger eﬀect sizes and smaller p-values.
31. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
96
Time (A.U.)SOZ (10th)
SOZ (20th)
SOZ (30th)
SOZ (40th)
SOZ (50th)
SOZ (60th)
SOZ (70th)
SOZ (80th)
SOZ (90th)
SOZ (100th)
SOZC (10th)
SOZC (20th)
SOZC (30th)
SOZC (40th)
SOZC (50th)
SOZC (60th)
SOZC (70th)
SOZC (80th)
SOZC (90th)
SOZC (100th)Quantile of Distribution 
 From SOZ and SOZCMean Feature Importances
SZ Onset
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
96
Time (A.U.)Std Feature Importances
0.00000.00050.00100.00150.0020
Feature Importance Value
Figure 18: Estimated feature importance (mean and stdev) of the associated fragility heatmap
used estimated using permutation. The metric of interest was the concordance statistic (i.e. AUC)
of the ROC curve. The original feature map is transformed into a 20-dimensional set of time-
varying statistics of its SOZandSOZCelectrodes describing the quantiles of the spatiotemporal
heatmap (10% - 100% quantiles). This time-varying summary allows these heatmaps to be pooled
together across subjects when training a Random Forest classiﬁer as described in Section 4.
32. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
R
N = 70L
N = 120.450.500.550.60Confidence Statistic
L
minus
R3
2
1
012
Cohen's dF
S(a)
M
N = 42F
N = 430.400.450.500.550.600.65Confidence Statistic
F
minus
M3
2
1
0123
Cohen's dF
S (b)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Onset Age (Yrs)0.450.500.550.600.65Confidence Statisticy=-0.0x+0.5
(c)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Surgery Age (Yrs)0.450.500.550.600.65Confidence Statisticy=-0.0x+0.5 (d)
Figure 19: Fragility success probabilities split by clinical factors, such as handedness (a), gender
(b), onset age (c)and age at surgery (d). Eﬀect sizes were estimated using the permutation test
and Mann Whitney U test described in section 4. The corresponding eﬀect sizes and p-values
were (0.1/0.99) for handedness, and (0.12/0.7) for gender. The slopes were all negligibly close to
0 for onset age and surgery age linear ﬁt. Note that not all patients had data for each of these
categories, so the subset of available data was used.
33. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Delta (Log-scale)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Theta (Log-scale)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Alpha (Log-scale)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Beta (Log-scale)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Gamma (Log-scale)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Nodal Fragility0.000.250.500.751.00Highgamma (Log-scale)
Fragility vs Spectral FeaturesFigure 20: Fragility versus frequency power in the delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma and
highgamma band for Patient_01, Patient_26, and Patient_40. For band deﬁnitions, refer to
Section 6.6. Every point represents the spectral power and neural fragility value from a randomly
chosen window and electrode from one of the patients. No signiﬁcant correlation is seen or
computed from the data. Each spectral feature and fragility are normalized as described in
Section 4.
34. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Evaluation in Epilepsy Center(Diagnosisofdrugresistantepilepsy(DRE))Phase 1 EvaluationBrain MRI, Video-EEGSPECT, MEG, PET, fMRI, DTIPatient Management ConferenceConcordant data(singlefocuslocalized)Discordant data(non-localized focus)Phase 2 EvaluationIntracranialrecordingSingle focus localizedResectionAblation
UnlocalizableFigure 21: Anoverviewoftheclinicalpathwaysthatleadtoepilepsysurgery. Afteraneurosurgical
consultation, in few cases, concordant non-invasive data allows a patient to proceed to surgery
immediately. In most other cases, invasive monitoring takes place, where localization is attempted
based on stereotypical electrographic signatures, described in Section 6.2 and in [127]. If the SOZ
was localized conﬁdently, and eloquent regions are not aﬀected, then a resection, or laser ablation
is performed. The dashed lines indicate where a decision split was made depending on the clinical
analyses of the data.
35. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
6 Supplementary Materials and Methods
6.1 Code and data availability
All code related to generate the ﬁgures are at https://github.com/adam2392/fragility_
in_ieeg (will be made public once published). We include a jupyter notebook written in
Python to help reproduce ﬁgures. We also released the raw iEEG data for patients from NIH,
UMH, UMMC, and JHH in the OpenNeuro repository in the form of BIDS-iEEG ( https:
//openneuro.org/datasets/ds003029 ). Due to restrictions on data sharing from CClinic, we
were unable to release the raw iEEG data that we received from this site.
6.2 Dataset collection
iEEG data from 91 DRE patients who underwent intracranial EEG monitoring, which included
either electrocorticography (ECoG), or depth electrodes with stereo-EEG (SEEG) were selected
from University of Maryland Medical Center (UMMC), University of Miami Jackson Memorial
Hospital (UMH), National Institute of Health (NIH), Johns Hopkins Hospital (JHH), and the
Cleveland Clinic (CClinic). Patients exhibiting the following criteria were excluded: no seizures
recorded, pregnant patients, EEG sampling rate less than 250 Hz, previous surgeries more then
6 months before the current implantation, and no surgery was performed (possibly from SOZ
localizations in eloquent areas). We deﬁne successful outcomes as seizure free (Engel class I and
ILAE scores of 1 and 2) at 12+ months post-op and failure outcomes with seizure recurrence
(Engel classes 2-4). Of these 91 patients, 44 experienced successful outcomes and 47 had failed
outcomes (age at surgery = 31.52 +/- 12.32 years) with a total of 462 seizures (seizure length =
97.82 +/- 91.32 seconds) and 14703 total number of recording electrodes (159.82 +/- 45.42 per
subject). [128, 129, 46].
Our clinician team categorized patients by surgical outcome, Engel class and ILAE score [130].
In addition, we categorized patients by their clinical complexity (CC) as follows: (1) lesional,
(2) focal temporal, (3) focal extratemporal, and (4) multi-focal (Figure 2) [46, 47]. Each of
these were categorized based on previous outcome studies that support this increasing level of
localization diﬃculty. Lesional patients have success rates of ˜70%, experiencing the highest rate
of surgical success because the lesions identiﬁed through MRI are likely to be part of the SOZ
[131, 132, 42, 59, 41, 133]. Localization and surgical success are more challenging patients with
non-lesional MRI, with average surgical success rates in temporal, extratemporal and multi-focal
epilepsy of ˜60%,˜45% and ˜30%, respectively [55, 56, 57, 58]. Patients that ﬁt into multiple
categories were placed into the more complex category. Next, clinicians identiﬁed electrodes
that they hypothesized as SOZ. In general, this was a subset of the resected region for all
patients, unless otherwise noted. The epileptologists deﬁne the clinically annotated SOZas the
electrodes that participated the earliest in seizures. Every patient’s SOZwas labeled by 1-3
trained epileptologists (depending on the center). The corresponding SOZcomplement that we
deﬁne, orSOZC, are the electrodes that are not part of the SOZ. For more detailed information
regarding each patient, see Supplemental Figure 9 and Supplemental clinical data summary Excel
ﬁle.
At all centers, data were recorded using either a Nihon Kohden (Tokyo, Japan) or Natus
(Pleasanton, USA) acquisition system with a typical sampling rate of 1000 Hz (for details regarding
sampling rate per patient, see Supplementary ﬁle table). Signals were referenced to a common
electrode placed subcutaneously on the scalp, on the mastoid process, or on the subdural grid.
At all centers, as part of routine clinical care, up to three board-certiﬁed epileptologists marked
the electrographic onset and the termination of each seizure by consensus. The time of seizure
onset was indicated by a variety of stereotypical electrographic features which included, but were
36. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
not limited to, the onset of fast rhythmic activity, an isolated spike or spike-and-wave complex
followed by rhythmic activity, or an electrodecremental response. Each snapshot available for a
patient was clipped at least 30 seconds before and after the ictal event. We discarded electrodes
from further analysis if they were deemed excessively noisy by clinicians, recording from white
matter, or were not EEG related (e.g. reference, EKG, or not attached to the brain) which
resulted in 97.23 +/- 34.87 (mean +/- std) electrodes used per patient in our analysis. Data was
initially stored in the form of the European Data Format (EDF) ﬁles [134]. We preprocessed
data into the BIDS-iEEG format and performed processing using Python3.6, Numpy, Scipy,
MNE-Python and MNE-BIDS [135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141]. Figures were generated using
Matplotlib and Seaborn [142, 143]. Statistical analyses were performed with mlxtend, pingouin,
dabest, scipy and scikit-learn [125, 144, 145, 141, 146]. Decisions regarding the need for invasive
monitoring and the placement of electrode arrays were made independently of this work and part
of routine clinical care. All data were acquired with approval of local Institutional Review Board
(IRB) at each clinical institution. The acquisition of data for research purposes was completed
with no impact on the clinical objectives of the patient stay. Digitized data were stored in an
IRB-approved database compliant with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) regulations.
6.3 Surgical Workup
Epilepsy surgery is a complicated workﬂow that depends on many clinical factors, such as the
history of the patient, and non-invasive testing [48]. We give a brief overview here to provide the
reader with a sense of the complexities inherent in evaluating eﬃcacy of localization algorithms,
and even the surgical outcomes (see a schematic in Supplementary Figure 21). Every DRE patient
generally begins with what is known as a Phase 1 evaluation, where a plethora of non-invasive
procedures are done, such as: MRI to look for structural abnormalities, SPECT and PET to look
at blood ﬂow and metabolism, fMRI/MEG to map eloquent brain regions and/or hyperactive
regions, and neuropsycological testing to determine if cognitive deﬁcits are related to seizure
onsets and provide a picture of likely post-operative cognitive deﬁcits. These are just samples of
tests that can be done, and active research is being done to explore their utilities in the context
of SOZ localization.
When a patient has undergone all the necessary tests, then Phase 2 evaluation begins, where
invasive monitoring is considered. iEEG electrodes are implanted into the patient’s brain, and are
monitored for several weeks in order to observe many seizures. While they are being monitored,
patients are taken oﬀ anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs), which present serious dangers to the patient
because they may have recurring seizures that could lead to sudden death. Once clinicians have
suﬃciently formed an SOZ hypothesis based on the iEEG data they have collected, and deem that
surgery will not aﬀect eloquent regions, then they proceed with surgery. The types of procedures
can be broadly classiﬁed as a resection, or laser ablation [147, 128, 148, 149].
Assuming that surgery includes the true epileptic tissue, then the patient will be seizure free.
On the other hand, there can be many reasons for a failed surgery, such as: neoepileptogenesis
[150, 151], kindling [152, 65], a mismatch between the SOZand resected region, or insuﬃcient
resection. Due to the complex nature of epilepsy and the brain, it is diﬃcult to determine the
cause of failure. We simply require that a useful feature representation of the electrodes separate
theSOZfrom theSOZCin successful surgeries, and vice-versa in failed surgeries.
37. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
6.4 Preprocessing of data
Every dataset was notch ﬁltered at 60 Hz (with a cutoﬀ window of 2 Hz) and bandpass ﬁltered
between 0.5 and the Nyquist frequency with a fourth order Butterworth ﬁlter. A common average
reference was applied to remove any correlated noise [153]. EEG sequences were broken down
into sequential windows and the features were computed within each window (see Methods 6.5,
6.6 and 6.7 for details). Each proposed feature representation produces a value for each electrode
for each separate window, and results in a full spatiotemporal heatmap when computed over
sequential windows with electrodes on the y-axis, time on the x-axis and feature value on the
color axis. In total, we computed 20 diﬀerent baseline feature representations from the iEEG
data: 6 frequency power bands, 7 eigenvector centralities (one for each frequency band coherence
connectivity matrix and one for a correlation connectivity matrix), 7 in-degrees (one for each
frequency band coherence connectivity matrix and one for a correlation connectivity matrix).
Values at each window of time were normalized across electrodes to values that could range from
0 up to at most 1, to allow for comparison of relative feature value diﬀerences across electrodes
over time; the higher a normalized feature, the more we hypothesized that electrode was part of
the SOZ [36].
6.5 Neural fragility of a network
To demonstrate how fragility is computed from a dynamical model, we consider a 2-node network
as shown in Supplemental Figure 11. In panel a), a stable network is shown where excitation and
inhibition are balanced. The network model is provided in the top row and takes a linear form of
x(t+ 1) = Ax(t);wheretis a time index (typically one millisecond). When the inhibitory node
is stimulated by an impulse, both nodes transiently respond and the EEG returns to baseline
(bottom row in Supplemental Figure 11). In panel b), the inhibitory node’s connections are
slightly perturbed in a direction that makes the inhibitory node lessinhibitory (see red changes
to its connectivity to the excitatory node). These changes are reﬂected in the model and diagram.
Now, when the inhibitory node is stimulated by an impulse, the EEG responses from each node
have a larger transient response but still return to baseline. Finally, in panel c), the inhibitory
node’s connections are further perturbed in a direction that makes the inhibitory node less
inhibitory. Now, when the inhibitory node is stimulated by an impulse, the EEG responses
oscillate demonstrating that the network has gone unstable. The fragility of the inhibitory node
is thus quantiﬁed as square root of 8 which is the norm of the perturbation vector applied to the
ﬁrst column in the network model.
To compute fragility heatmaps from iEEG recordings, we constructed simple linear models as
described above, but one for each 250 ms iEEG window. We used a sparse least-squares with a
10e-5 l2-norm regularization to ensure that the model identiﬁed was stable as in [37, 36]. Then, we
slid the window 125 ms and repeated the process, generating a sequence of linear network models
in time as in Supplemental Figure 8b). We systematically computed the minimum perturbation
required for each electrode’s connections (Supplemental Figure 8b) to produce instability for the
entire network as described in [36]. The electrodes that were the most fragile were hypothesized
to be related to the SOZ in these epilepsy networks (seen as the dark-red color in the turbo
colormap in Figure 3).
6.6 Baseline features - spectral features
We constructed spectral-based features from frequency bands of interest by applying a multi-taper
Fourier transform over sliding windows of data with a window/step size of 2.5/0.5 seconds [154,
28]. We required relatively longer time windows in order to accurately estimate some of the
38. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
lower frequency bands. Each EEG time series was ﬁrst transformed into a 3-dimensional array
(electrodes X frequency X time), and then averaged within each frequency band to form six
diﬀerent spectral feature representations of the data. We break down frequency bands as follows:
1. Delta Frequency Band [0.5 - 4 Hz]
2. Theta Frequency Band [4 - 8 Hz]
3. Alpha Frequency Band [8 - 13 Hz]
4. Beta Frequency Band [13 - 30 Hz]
5. Gamma Frequency Band [30 - 90 Hz]
6. High-Gamma Frequency Band [90 - 300 Hz]
Note that the High-Gamma frequency band includes frequencies of "ripples" - a category of
HFOs.
6.7 Baseline features - graph analysis of networks
We computed a time domain model using Pearson correlation (equation 1) and a frequency domain
model using coherence (equation 2). We computed the connectivity matrix using MNE-Python
and used the default values [138, 137]. In the equations, (i;j)are the electrode indices, Cov is
the covariance, is the standard deviation, fis the frequency band, and Gis cross-spectral
density. Note that these connectivity models attempt to capture linear correlations either in time,
or in a speciﬁc frequency band, but are not dynamical system representations of the data (i.e.
x(t+ 1) =Ax(t)). For each network-based feature, a sliding window/step size of 2.5/0.5 seconds
were used, resulting in a sequence of network matrices over time resulting in 3-dimensional arrays
(electrodes X electrodes X time) [27, 28, 30].
Corrij=Cov(xi;xj)
xixj(1)
Cohij(f) =jGij(f)j2
Gii(f)Gjj(f)(2)
From each network matrix, we computed the eigenvector centrality [28, 27], and the in-degree
[26] features of the network for each electrode across time. Centrality describes how inﬂuential a
node is within a graph network. In-degree is the weighted sum of the connections that connect to
a speciﬁc node. Both features are potential measures that attempt to capture the inﬂuence of a
speciﬁc electrode within an iEEG network, through the lens of graph theory.
6.8 Experimental design
We tested if the neural fragility representation of iEEG data localized the SOZbetter compared
to other proposed features, compared to clinicians and compared to chance. Electrodes with
extreme feature values deviating from the average were hypothesized as part of the SOZ.
In order to compute a probability of successful surgical outcome for each patient, we trained a
non-parametric machine learning classiﬁer, a Random Forest classiﬁer to output a probability
value that the surgery was a success. We input the distribution of feature values in the clinically
SOZand theSOZC. We considered a set of hyperparameters that we then performed evaluation
over a 10-fold nested cross-validation scheme. We then performed statistical analysis on the ﬁnal
classiﬁcation performance to determine the most robust feature representation.
39. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Pooled Patient Analysis First, we analyzed the diﬀerence in the distributions of neural
fragility between SOZand theSOZC. We pooled all patients together, stratiﬁed by surgical
outcome and compared the neural fragility distributions using a one-sided Mann-Whitney U test
(Success pvalue = 3.326e-70, Fail pvalue = 0.355; Supplementary Figure 12). This suggested
that there is some eﬀect on average where fragility is higher in the SOZfor successful outcomes,
so we next looked at the distributions per patient’s seizure snapshot around seizure onset. In
Supplementary Figure 13, success outcome patients have a higher neural fragility in the SOZ.
This eﬀect is seen when pooling patients across all centers as well, where neural fragility is
either i) higher before the seizure onset, or ii) has a marked diﬀerence starting at seizure onset
(Supplementary Figure 14). Next, we performed a classiﬁcation experiment (Figure 2) that would
determine the robustness of the neural fragility representation at the patient level benchmarked
against 20 other features.
Non-parametric Decision-Tree Classiﬁer In order to determine the value of a feature
representation of the iEEG data, we posed a binary classiﬁcation problem where the goal would
be to determine the surgical outcome (success or failure) for a particular patient’s spatiotemporal
heatmap. Each spatiotemporal heatmap was split into its SOZandSOZCset (FSOZandFSOZC
in Figure 8). Then each set of electrodes’ feature distributions were summarized with its quantile
statistics over time, resulting in twenty signals: ten quantiles from 10-100 of the SOZ and ten
quantiles of the SOZCover time. We used a Random Forest (RF) classiﬁer [52]. Speciﬁcally,
it was a variant known as the Structured Random Forest, or Manifold Random Forests [51,
50]. The manifold RF approach allows one to encode structural assumptions on the dataset,
such as correlations in time of the fed in data matrix. The input data matrix for each RF is a
multivariate time series that summarizes the quantile statistics of the SOZandSOZCover time.
As a result, we obtained better results using the manifold RF because it took advantage of local
correlations in time, rather than treating all values in the data matrix input as independent as
done in a traditional RF model. This approach allowed our classiﬁers to learn faster with less
data, compared to treating all inputs as independent in the traditional RF model. For more
information on how manifold RF improves on traditional RF, we refer readers to [50, 51]. For
every model, we used the default parameters from scikit-learn and the rerf package [146, 51]. The
output of the decision tree classiﬁer is:
^f(FSOZ;FSOZC) =P(success)
whereare the trained RF parameters and FSOZare the heatmap values for the SOZand
FSOZCare the heatmap values for the SOZCfor a speciﬁc feature representation F (shown in
Supplemental Figure 8). ^fis the function we are trying to estimate, which predicts the probability
of successful surgical outcome for a given feature heatmap.
Hyperparameters When looking at iEEG data, clinicians inherently select windows of interest
due to external and prior information about when the seizure clinically manifests. Similarly,
we consider a window of 10 seconds before seizure onset to the ﬁrst 5% of the seizure event.
This window was chosen apriori to analysis, and we repeated the analyses with slightly varying
windows, but the results were consistent. In order to provide further contrast to the spatiotemporal
heatmaps, we considered also a threshold between 0.3 and 0.7 (spaced by 0.1) that would be
applied to the heatmap such that values below were set to 0. This is analagous to clinicians being
able to look at a iEEG data and hone in only on areas that are extreme relative to the rest. We
selected a ﬁxed threshold through nested cross-validation, where thresholds are selected on the
train/validation set, and then performance is measured on the held out test set.
40. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Structured Heatmap Input In order to train a RF classiﬁer on patients with varying number
of channels, we structured the spatiotemporal heatmap inputs to summarize the distributions of
the feature values in the SOZandSOZCsets. We converted these into a vector of 20 quantile
values (10 quantiles for SOZand 10 forSOZC), taken evenly from the 10th to the 100th quantiles.
This forms a data matrix per heatmap, which summarizes the SOZandSOZCdistributions over
time, ﬁxed around the seizure onset time.
Nested Cross-Validation Feature Evaluation It is common practice when building a
supervised machine learning model to incorporate cross-validation (CV) where the dataset is
split into a training and testing set. However, when one has hyperparameters (in addition to
the machine learning model parameters) it is necessary to control against over-ﬁtting to the test
dataset [155]. Due to our hyperparameter selection of the optimal heatmap thresholds, we used a
nested CV scheme, where we split the dataset into a training, validation and a "lock-box" dataset,
where the hyperparameters were tuned on an inner CV (70% of the dataset) with the training
and validation data, and then performance was evaluated on the lock-box dataset. All features
were optimized separately, so that their hyperparameters were optimal for that feature. We
computed the discrimination statistic known as the area under the curve (AUC). We repeated the
nested-cross validation 10 times, resulting a 10-fold CV. In addition, we performed patient-level
CV, ensuring that no patient was in multiple splits of the dataset (i.e. any one patient is only in
the train, test, or lock-box dataset). We performed sampling with respect to clinical complexity
to ensure that there was an approximately some lesional, temporal, extratemporal and multi-focal
patients in the training dataset over each CV fold. We found that this performed slightly better
for all features compared to random sampling.
Statistical analysis - Hypothesis Testing Success probability values were computed from
the RF classiﬁers trained on the spatiotemporal feature representations of the iEEG data (fragility,
spectral features, and graph metrics from correlation and coherence graphs) resulting in a
distribution of probabilities for each feature.
To compare the RF model performance across the 20 proposed features of fragility, spectral
power and graph metrics, we computed Cohen’s D eﬀect size diﬀerences between the groups of
interest, and then Mann-Whitney U tests for unpaired data, and paired Wilcoxon rank-sum tests
for paired data [125]. We corrected for any multiple comparisons using the Holm-Bonferroni
step-down method [126]. In some cases, we also present Welch’s t-test and the Likelihood Q-ratio
test (LQRT) results to show that the results are robust to statistical test chosen. The LQRT
has been shown to be more robust compared to both the Mann-Whitney U-test and t-test in the
presence of noise [156, 157]. Note that it utilizes a bootstrapping procedure, so it’s resolution is
0.001 (i.e. if it produces a p-value of 0, then that means it is < 0.001).
We compared the success probabilities stratiﬁed by diﬀerent clinical covariates: surgical
outcome, Engel class, clinical complexity, handedness, gender, onset age, and surgery age. We
then estimated the eﬀect size diﬀerences between distributions in the form of a Cohen’s d statistic
[158]. Cohen’s d was estimated using a non-parametric bootstrapping on the observed data
with 5000 re-samples used to construct a 95% conﬁdence interval [125]. The null hypothesis of
our experimental setup was that the success probabilities came from the same population. The
alternative hypothesis was that the populations were diﬀerent (i.e. a feature could distinguish
success from failed outcomes, or between diﬀerent Engel classes).
41. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
6.9 Featureevaluationusingpredictedprobabilityofsuccessfulsurgery
The fragility and all baseline features proposed generated a spatiotemporal heatmap using EEG
snapshots of ictal data (outlined in Figure 8). To compare spatiotemporal heatmaps across
features, we computed a probability of success (i.e. a conﬁdence score) that is hypothesized to be
high for success outcomes and low for failures for "good" features. We expected that fragility
would follow a trend of decreasing conﬁdence as CC, Engel score and ILAE score increase. For
each clinical covariate group, we measured the eﬀect size diﬀerence via bootstrapped sampling,
and the statistical p-value between the distributions. We hypothesized that : i) fragility would
have an eﬀect size diﬀerence signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero when comparing success vs failed
outcomes, ii) in addition, this eﬀect size would correlate with meaningful clinical covariates, such
as CC and Engel class and iii) both the eﬀect size and p-value would be better than the proposed
baseline features.
The higher the probability of success (closer to 1), the more likely the feature indicated a
successful surgery, and the lower it was (closer to 0), the more likely the feature indicated a failed
surgery. To compute this value, we ﬁrst partition the heatmap into a SOZandSOZCas seen
in Supplemental Figure 8. This forms the two sets of signals that represent the spatiotemporal
feature values of the SOZset vs theSOZCset of electrodes. Then we take windows of interest,
where clinicians ﬁnd most valuable for SOZlocalization: the period before seizure and right after
seizure onset, and performing a nested CV of RF models. The eﬃcacy of each proposed feature
is evaluated based on how well the trained RF model is able to predict the surgical outcomes.
We tested our hypotheses stated above by computing a probability of success from each feature
heatmap for each patient, and estimated the distribution diﬀerences of the CS between various
clinical covariates.
6.10 Spatiotemporal feature heatmap interpretability
In order to determine how valid the output probability values are, we ﬁrst computed a calibration
curve, which told us how well-calibrated the probability values were [159]. We furthermore
compared the calibration curves across neural fragility, spectral features and graph metrics. With
relatively good discrimination measured by the AUC and good calibration, we were able to then
compare the CS across clinical complexity (CC) scores, Engel scores and ILAE scores. Since
epilepsy and reasons for failed surgeries are so complex, these are clinical methods for stratifying
patient groups based on observed etiology. We analyzed how the success probability diﬀers across
each of these categories. In addition, we looked at how the success probabilities might diﬀer
across other clinical variables, such as sex (M vs F), handedness (R vs L), epilepsy onset age
(years), and age during surgery (years).
Qualitatively reading oﬀ a spatiotemporal heatmap is highly interpretable as one can match
raw iEEG segments to certain time periods in the heatmap. For every patient, the time-varying
quantile signals (from 10th to the 100th) of the SOZandSOZCwere computed for every iEEG
heatmap, as speciﬁed in Methods Section 6.8. We used permutations feature importance sampling
to obtain a relative weighting of each signal over time and how important it was in allowing the
RF to correctly determine surgical outcome. This was visualized as a heatmap showing the mean
and std importance scores of the SOZandSOZCstatistics, as shown in Figure 18.
In addition, we claim that human interpretability of the spatiotemporal heatmap relies on
contrast between the SOZandSOZCregions in successful outcomes. Using the results of the
feature importance permutation test, we computed for every heatmap, an interpretability ratio,
which was deﬁned as:
42. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
I=FSOZ(90th)
FSOZC(90th)
where I is the interpretability ratio for a speciﬁc subject’s feature heatmap F. FSOZ(90th)is
the 90th quantile and up feature values of the SOZ, andFSOZC(90th)is for theSOZC. This
ratio is then stratiﬁed according to surgical outcome, which we expect higher ratios for successful
outcomes and lower ratios for failed outcomes. We quantiﬁed this diﬀerence using Cohen’s D
eﬀect size and Mann Whitney U-test Pvalues (see Methods 6.8).
7 Acknowledgements
AL is supported by NIH T32 EB003383, the NSF GRFP (DGE-1746891), the Arcs Scholarship,
Whitaker Fellowship and the Chateaubriand Fellowship. SVS is supported by NIH R21 NS103113,
the Coulter Foundation, Maryland Innovation Initiative, US NSF Career Award 1055560 and the
Burroughs Wellcome Fund CASI Award 1007274. Computational resources were also provided by
the Maryland Advanced Research Computing Center (MARCC). The authors would like to thank
Carey Priebe for useful discussions on statistical analyses, Joshua Vogelstein for introducing AL
to the concepts of Structured Random Forests, Sarah Kim and Rachel June Smith for helpful
reviews of the manuscript and Macauley Breault for help in creating brain ﬁgures.
8 Author Contributions
AL, JM and SVS conceived the project. AL, IC, DB, JJ, AC, AK, JHopp, SC, JHaagensen,
EJ, WA, NC, ZF, JB and JM collected and supervised human epilepsy recordings and processes
related to IRB at their respective centers. IC, DB, JJ, AC, AK oversaw data from UMH. JHopp,
SC, and JHaagensen oversaw data from UMMC. EJ, WA and NC oversaw data from JHH. SI
and KZ oversaw data from NIH. ZF, JB and JM oversaw data from CClinic. AL organized the
data from all centers, converted data to BIDS, conducted the analyses and generated the ﬁgures.
AL and SVS wrote the paper with input from the other authors. CH helped develop RF model
and statistical analyses.
43. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
References
[1]M. J. Brodie, S. D. Shorvon, R. Canger, P. Halasz, S. Johannessen, P. Thompson, H. G.
Wieser, and P. Wolf. Commission on European Aﬀairs: Appropriate standards of epilepsy
care across Europe . 1997. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1997.tb01224.x.
[2]A. T. Berg and M. M. Kelly. “Deﬁning intractability: Comparisons among published
deﬁnitions.” In: Epilepsia 47.2 (2006), pp. 431–436. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.
00440.x.
[3]P. Kwan and M. J. Brodie. “Early Identiﬁcation of Refractory Epilepsy.” In: N. Engl. J.
Med.342.5 (2000), pp. 314–319. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200002033420503 .
[4] A. T. Berg. “Identiﬁcation of Pharmacoresistant Epilepsy.” In: Neurol. Clin. 27.4 (2009),
pp. 1003–1013. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2009.06.001 .
[5] WHO and W. H. Organization. Epilepsy. 2019.
[6]B. C. Jobst. Consensus over individualism: Validation of the ILAE deﬁnition for drug
resistant epilepsy. 2015. doi: 10.5698/1535-7511-15.4.172.
[7]A. K. Ngugi, C. Bottomley, I. Kleinschmidt, J. W. Sander, and C. R. Newton. “Estimation
of the burden of active and life-time epilepsy: A meta-analytic approach.” In: Epilepsia
51.5 (2010), pp. 883–890. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02481.x.
[8]C. E. Begley and T. L. Durgin. The direct cost of epilepsy in the United States: A systematic
review of estimates . 2015. doi: 10.1111/epi.13084.
[9]H. O. Lüders, I. Najm, D. Nair, P. Widdess-Walsh, and W. Bingman. “The epileptogenic
zone: General principles.” In: Epileptic Disord. 8.SUPPL. 2 (2006).
[10]L. Jehi. The epileptogenic zone: Concept and deﬁnition . 2018. doi: 10 . 5698 / 1535 -
7597.18.1.12 .
[11]W. Penﬁeld. “Epileptogenic lesions.” In: Acta Neurol. Psychiatr. Belg. 56.2 (1956), pp. 75–
88.
[12]W. Penﬁeld and H. Jasper. “Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain.”
In:J. Am. Med. Assoc. 155.1 (1954), p. 86. doi: 10.1001/jama.1954.03690190092039.
[13]M. Morrell. Brain stimulation for epilepsy: Can scheduled or responsive neurostimulation
stop seizures? 2006. doi: 10.1097/01.wco.0000218233.60217.84 .
[14]B. C. Jobst, T. M. Darcey, V. M. Thadani, and D. W. Roberts. “Brain stimulation for the
treatment of epilepsy: Brain Stimulation in Epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia 51 (2010), pp. 88–92.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02618.x.
[15]S. Wiebe, W. T. Blume, J. P. Girvin, and M. Eliasziw. “A randomized, controlled trial of
surgery for temporal-lobe epilepsy.” In: N. Engl. J. Med. 345.5 (2001), pp. 311–318. doi:
10.1056/NEJM200108023450501 .
[16]H. E. Scharfman. The neurobiology of epilepsy. 2007. doi: 10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z .
[17]A. Korzeniewska, M. C. Cervenka, C. C. Jouny, J. R. Perilla, J. Harezlak, G. K. Bergey,
P. J. Franaszczuk, and N. E. Crone. “Ictal propagation of high frequency activity is
recapitulated in interictal recordings: Eﬀective connectivity of epileptogenic networks
recorded with intracranial EEG.” In: Neuroimage 101 (2014), pp. 96–113.
[18]J.Jeppesen,S.Beniczky,A.Fuglsang-Frederiksen,P.Sidenius,andY.Jasemian.“Detection
of epileptic-seizures by means of power spectrum analysis of heart rate variability: A pilot
study.” In: Technol. Heal. Care 18.6 (2010), pp. 417–426. doi: 10.3233/THC-2010-0606 .
44. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[19]G. Alarcon, C. D. Binnie, R. D. C. Elwes, and C. E. Polkey. “Power spectrum and
intracranial EEG patterns at seizure onset in partial epilepsy.” In: Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 94.5 (1995), pp. 326–337. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(94)00286-T .
[20]B. R. Tharp and W. Gersch. “Spectral analysis of seizures in humans.” In: Comput. Biomed.
Res.8.6 (1975), pp. 503–521. doi: 10.1016/0010-4809(75)90023-3.
[21]A. V. Medvedev, A. M. Murro, and K. J. Meador. “Abnormal interictal gamma activity
may manifest a seizure onset zone in temporal lobe epilepsy.” In: Int. J. Neural Syst. 21.2
(2011), pp. 103–114. doi: 10.1142/S0129065711002699.
[22]S. A. Weiss, G. P. Banks, G. M. McKhann, R. R. Goodman, R. G. Emerson, A. J.
Trevelyan, and C. A. Schevon. “Ictal high frequency oscillations distinguish two types of
seizure territories in humans.” In: Brain136.Pt 12 (2013), pp. 3796–3808. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awt276 .
[23]S. V. Gliske, Z. T. Irwin, K. A. Davis, K. Sahaya, C. Chestek, and W. C. Stacey. “Universal
automated high frequency oscillation detector for real-time, long term EEG.” In: Clin.
Neurophysiol. 127.2 (2016), pp. 1057–1066. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2015.07.016.
[24]A. Li, Z. Fitzgerald, J. Hopp, E. Johnson, N. Crone, J. Bulacio, J. Martinez-Gonzalez,
S. Inati, K. Zaghloul, and S. V. Sarma. “Virtual Cortical Stimulation Mapping of Epilepsy
Networks to Localize the Epileptogenic Zone.” In: Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. EMBS. Vol. 2019. Cc. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
2019, pp. 2328–2331. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2019.8856591.
[25]P. Shah, A. Ashourvan, F. Mikhail, A. Pines, L. Kini, R. T. Shinohara, D. S. Bassett,
B. Litt, and K. A. Davis. “Local structural connectivity directs seizure spread in focal
epilepsy.” In: bioRxiv(2018), p. 406793. doi: 10.1101/406793 .
[26]Y. H. Li, X. L. Ye, Q. Q. Liu, J. W. Mao, P. J. Liang, J. W. Xu, and P. M. Zhang.
“Localization of epileptogenic zone based on graph analysis of stereo-EEG.” In: Epilepsy
Res.128 (2016), pp. 149–157. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2016.10.021.
[27]A. Li, B. Chennuri, S. Subramanian, R. Yaﬀe, S. Gliske, W. Stacey, R. Norton, A. Jordan,
K. A. Zaghloul, S. K. Inati, S. Agrawal, J. J. Haagensen, J. Hopp, C. Atallah, E. Johnson,
N. Crone, W. S. Anderson, Z. Fitzgerald, J. Bulacio, J. T. Gale, S. V. Sarma, and J.
Gonzalez-Martinez. “Using network analysis to localize the epileptogenic zone from invasive
EEG recordings in intractable focal epilepsy.” In: Netw. Neurosci. 02.02 (2018), pp. 218–
240.doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00043.
[28]S. P. Burns, S. Santaniello, R. B. Yaﬀe, C. C. Jouny, N. E. Crone, G. K. Bergey, W. S.
Anderson, and S. V. Sarma. “Network dynamics of the brain and inﬂuence of the epileptic
seizure onset zone.” In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111.49 (2014), E5321–E5330. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1401752111.
[29]R. Yaﬀe, S. Burns, J. Gale, H. J. Park, J. Bulacio, J. Gonzalez Martinez, and S. V. Sarma.
“Brain state evolution during seizure and under anesthesia: A network-based analysis of
stereotaxic eeg activity in drug-resistant epilepsy patients.” In: Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS . IEEE, 2012, pp. 5158–5161. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.
6347155.
[30]R. B. Yaﬀe, P. Borger, P. Megevand, D. M. Groppe, M. A. Kramer, C. J. Chu, S.
Santaniello, C. Meisel, A. D. Mehta, and S. V. Sarma. “Physiology of functional and
eﬀective networks in epilepsy.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol. 126.2 (2015), pp. 227–236. doi:
10.1016/j.clinph.2014.09.009.
45. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[31]A. N. Khambhati, K. A. Davis, T. H. Lucas, B. Litt, and D. S. Bassett. “Virtual Cortical
Resection Reveals Push-Pull Network Control Preceding Seizure Evolution.” In: Neuron
91.5 (2016), pp. 1170–1182. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.07.039.
[32]A. N. Khambhati, K. A. Davis, B. S. Oommen, S. H. Chen, T. H. Lucas, B. Litt, and D. S.
Bassett. “Dynamic Network Drivers of Seizure Generation, Propagation and Termination
in Human Neocortical Epilepsy.” In: PLOS Comput. Biol. 11.12 (2015). Ed. by M. Kramer,
e1004608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004608.
[33]D. S. Bassett and O. Sporns. “Network neuroscience.” In: Nat. Neurosci. 20.3 (2017),
pp. 353–364. doi: 10.1038/nn.4502.
[34]M. E. Lynall, D. S. Bassett, R. Kerwin, P. J. McKenna, M. Kitzbichler, U. Muller, and E.
Bullmore. “Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia.” In: J. Neurosci.
30.28 (2010), pp. 9477–9487. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0333-10.2010.
[35]R. Abreu, A. Leal, and P. Figueiredo. “Identiﬁcation of epileptic brain states by dynamic
functionalconnectivityanalysisofsimultaneousEEG-fMRI:adictionarylearningapproach.”
In:Sci. Rep. 9.1 (2019), p. 638. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-36976-y.
[36]A. Li, S. Inati, K. Zaghloul, and S. Sarma. “Fragility in Epileptic Networks : the Epilepto-
genic Zone.” In: Am. Control Conf. 2017, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.23919/ACC.2017.7963378 .
[37]A. Li, K. M. Gunnarsdottir, S. Inati, K. Zaghloul, J. Gale, J. Bulacio, J. Martinez-Gonzalez,
and S. V. Sarma. “Linear time-varying model characterizes invasive EEG signals generated
from complex epileptic networks.” In: Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
EMBS. 1. IEEE, 2017, pp. 2802–2805. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2017.8037439.
[38]D. Sritharan and S. V. Sarma. “Fragility in Dynamic Networks: Application to Neural
Networks in the Epileptic Cortex.” In: Neural Comput. 26.10 (2014), pp. 2294–2327. doi:
10.1162/NECO_a_00644 .
[39]N. Jette, A. Y. Reid, and S. Wiebe. “What are the limitations of medical therapy for
epilepsy? Surgical management of epilepsy Key points.” In: CMAJ186.13 (2014), p. 186.
doi: 10.1503/cmaj.121291 .
[40]C. E. Begley, M. Famulari, J. F. Annegers, D. R. Lairson, T. F. Reynolds, S. Coan, S.
Dubinsky, M. E. Newmark, C. Leibson, E. L. So, and W. A. Rocca. “The cost of epilepsy
in the United States: An estimate from population- based clinical and survey data.” In:
Epilepsia 41.3 (2000), pp. 342–351. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.2000.tb00166.x .
[41]L. E. Jeha, I. Najm, W. Bingaman, D. Dinner, P. Widdess-Walsh, and H. Lüders. “Surgical
outcome and prognostic factors of frontal lobe epilepsy surgery.” In: Brain130.2 (2007),
pp. 574–584. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl364.
[42]J. C. Bulacio, L. Jehi, C. Wong, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, P. Kotagal, D. Nair, I. Najm, and W.
Bingaman. “Long-term seizure outcome after resective surgery in patients evaluated with
intracranial electrodes.” In: Epilepsia 53.10 (2012), pp. 1722–1730. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-
1167.2012.03633.x.
[43]J. A. González-Martínez, T. Srikijvilaikul, D. Nair, and W. E. Bingaman. “Long-term
seizure outcome in reoperation after failure of epilepsy surgery.” In: Neurosurgery 60.5
(2007), pp. 873–879. doi: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000255438.13871.FA.
[44]W. C. Stacey and B. Litt. Technology Insight: Neuroengineering and epilepsy - Designing
devices for seizure control. 2008. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0750.
[45]H. G. Wieser. “Epilepsy surgery: Past, present and future.” In: Seizure7.3 (1998), pp. 173–
184.doi: 10.1016/S1059-1311(98)80032-0 .
46. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[46]J. C. Bulacio, P. Chauvel, and A. McGonigal. Stereoelectroencephalography: Interpretation .
2016. doi: 10.1097/WNP.0000000000000305.
[47]S. Sheikh, D. Nair, R. Gross, and J. Gonzalez Martinez. “Tracking a changing paradigm
and the modern face of epilepsy surgery: A comprehensive and critical review on the hunt
for the optimal extent of resection in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia 60.9
(2019), pp. 1768–1793. doi: 10.1111/epi.16310.
[48]B. Frauscher. “Localizing the epileptogenic zone.” In: Curr. Opin. Neurol. (2020), pp. 1–9.
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000790.
[49]O. Grinenko, J. Li, J. C. Mosher, I. Z. Wang, J. C. Bulacio, J. Gonzalez-Martinez, D. Nair,
I. Najm, R. M. Leahy, and P. Chauvel. “A ﬁngerprint of the epileptogenic zone in human
epilepsies.” In: Brain141.1 (2018), pp. 117–131. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx306.
[50]R. Perry, T. M. Tomita, R. Mehta, J. Arroyo, J. Patsolic, B. Falk, and J. T. Vogelstein.
“Manifold Forests: Closing the Gap on Neural Networks.” In: Arxiv(2019).
[51]T. M. Tomita, J. Browne, C. Shen, J. Chung, J. L. Patsolic, B. Falk, C. E. Priebe, J. Yim,
R. Burns, M. Maggioni, and J. T. Vogelstein. “Sparse projection oblique randomer forests.”
In:J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21 (2020).
[52] L. Breiman. “Random Forests.” In: Mach. Learn. 45 (2001), pp. 5–32.
[53]R. Couronné, P. Probst, and A. L. Boulesteix. “Random forest versus logistic regression:
A large-scale benchmark experiment.” In: BMC Bioinformatics 19.1 (2018), p. 270. doi:
10.1186/s12859-018-2264-5.
[54]S. S. Sawilowsky. “Very large and huge eﬀect sizes.” In: J. Mod. Appl. Stat. Methods 8.2
(2009), pp. 597–599. doi: 10.22237/jmasm/1257035100.
[55]S. Sheikh, N. Thompson, W. Bingaman, J. Gonzalez Martinez, I. Najm, and L. Jehi.
“Redeﬁning success in epilepsy surgery: The importance of relative seizure reduction
in patient reported quality of life.” In: Epilepsia August (2019), pp. 2078–2085. doi:
10.1111/epi.16327.
[56]P. Ryvlin, J. H. Cross, and S. Rheims. Epilepsy surgery in children and adults . 2014. doi:
10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70156-5.
[57]V. N. Vakharia, J. S. Duncan, J. A. Witt, C. E. Elger, R. Staba, and J. Engel. “Getting the
best outcomes from epilepsy surgery.” In: Ann. Neurol. (2018). doi: 10.1002/ana.25205 .
[58]H. Chen, M. Agostini, K. Ding, P. Gupta, C. Madden, B. Mickey, P. Van Ness, and P.
Modur. “Predictors of seizure recurrence and longitudinal outcome after epilepsy surgery.”
In:Neurology 80.1 (2013).
[59]S. J. See, L. E. Jehi, S. Vadera, J. Bulacio, I. Najm, and W. Bingaman. “Surgical outcomes
in patients with extratemporal epilepsy and subtle or normal magnetic resonance imaging
ﬁndings.” In: Neurosurgery 73.1 (2013), pp. 68–76. doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000429839.
76460.b7.
[60]J. F. Téllez-Zenteno, R. Dhar, and S. Wiebe. Long-term seizure outcomes following epilepsy
surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis . 2005. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh449 .
[61]J. Tellez-Zenteno. “Reasons for reoperation after epilepsy surgery: a review based on a
complex clinical case with three operations.” In: Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 6 (2010),
p. 409. doi: 10.2147/ndt.s10384.
47. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[62]Y. Varatharajah, M. J. Chong, K. Saboo, B. Berry, B. Brinkmann, G. Worrell, and R.
Iyer. “EEG-GRAPH: A factor-graph-based model for capturing spatial, temporal, and
observational relationships in electroencephalograms.” In: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
Vol. 2017-Decem. 2017, pp. 5372–5381.
[63]Y. Varatharajah, B. Berry, J. Cimbalnik, V. Kremen, J. Van Gompel, M. Stead, B.
Brinkmann, R. Iyer, and G. Worrell. “Integrating artiﬁcial intelligence with real-time
intracranial EEG monitoring to automate interictal identiﬁcation of seizure onset zones in
focal epilepsy.” In: J. Neural Eng. 15.4 (2018). doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac960.
[64]A. Sharma. “Epileptic seizure prediction using power analysis in beta band of EEG signals.”
In:Int. Conf. Soft Comput. Tech. Implementations, ICSCTI 2015. Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2016, pp. 117–121. doi: 10.1109/ICSCTI.2015.7489552 .
[65]E. Bertram. The relevance of kindling for human epilepsy . 2007. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-
1167.2007.01068.x.
[66]K. D. Laxer, E. Trinka, L. J. Hirsch, F. Cendes, J. Langﬁtt, N. Delanty, T. Resnick,
and S. R. Benbadis. The consequences of refractory epilepsy and its treatment . 2014. doi:
10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.05.031 .
[67]I. M. Najm, R. Naugle, R. M. Busch, W. Bingaman, and H. Lüders. “Deﬁnition of the
epileptogenic zone in a patient with non-lesional temporal lobe epilepsy arising from the
dominant hemisphere.” In: Epileptic Disord. Vol. 8. SUPPL. 2. 2006, S27–35.
[68]J. Jeppesen, S. Beniczky, P. Johansen, P. Sidenius, and A. Fuglsang-Frederiksen. “Detection
of epileptic seizures with a modiﬁed heart rate variability algorithm based on Lorenz plot.”
In:Seizure24.C (2015), pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2014.11.004.
[69]C. E. Priebe, D. L. Sussman, M. Tang, and J. T. Vogelstein. “Statistical Inference on
Errorfully Observed Graphs.” In: J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 24.4 (2015), pp. 930–953. doi:
10.1080/10618600.2014.951049.
[70]A. Bragin, C. L. Wilson, R. J. Staba, M. Reddick, I. Fried, and J. Engel. “Interictal
high-frequency oscillations (80-500Hz) in the human epileptic brain: Entorhinal cortex.”
In:Ann. Neurol. 52.4 (2002), pp. 407–415. doi: 10.1002/ana.10291.
[71]G. Worrell and J. Gotman. High-frequency oscillations and other electrophysiological
biomarkers of epilepsy: Clinical studies . 2011. doi: 10.2217/bmm.11.74.
[72]T. Fedele, S. Burnos, E. Boran, N. Krayenbühl, P. Hilﬁker, T. Grunwald, and J. Sarnthein.
“Resection of high frequency oscillations predicts seizure outcome in the individual patient.”
In:Sci. Rep. 7.1 (2017), p. 13836. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13064-1.
[73]S. A. Weiss, Z. Waldman, F. Raimondo, D. Slezak, M. Donmez, G. Worrell, A. Bragin,
J. Engel, R. Staba, and M. Sperling. “Localizing epileptogenic regions using high-frequency
oscillations and machine learning.” In: Biomark. Med. 13.5 (2019), pp. 409–418. doi:
10.2217/bmm-2018-0335 .
[74]J. Jacobs, R. Staba, E. Asano, H. Otsubo, J. Y. Wu, M. Zijlmans, I. Mohamed, P. Kahane,
F. Dubeau, V. Navarro, and J. Gotman. “High-frequency oscillations (HFOs) in clinical
epilepsy.” In: Prog. Neurobiol. 98.3 (2012), pp. 302–315. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.
2012.03.001.
[75]B. Frauscher, F. Bartolomei, K. Kobayashi, J. Cimbalnik, M. A. van ‘t Klooster, S. Rampp,
H. Otsubo, Y. Höller, J. Y. Wu, E. Asano, J. Engel, P. Kahane, J. Jacobs, and J. Gotman.
High-frequency oscillations: The state of clinical research . 2017. doi: 10.1111/epi.13829 .
48. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[76]R. S. Fisher, W. R. S. Webber, R. P. Lesser, S. Arroyo, and S. Uematsu. “High-frequency
EEG activity at the start of seizures.” In: J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 9.3 (1992), pp. 441–448.
doi: 10.1097/00004691-199207010-00012.
[77]J. D. Jirsch, E. Urrestarazu, P. LeVan, A. Olivier, F. Dubeau, and J. Gotman. “High-
frequency oscillations during human focal seizures.” In: Brain129.6 (2006), pp. 1593–1608.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl085.
[78]M. Zijlmans, P. Jiruska, R. Zelmann, F. S. S. Leijten, J. G. R. Jeﬀerys, and J. Gotman.
“High-frequency oscillations as a new biomarker in epilepsy.” In: Ann. Neurol. 71.2 (2012),
pp. 169–178. doi: 10.1002/ana.22548.
[79]G. A. Worrell, L. Parish, S. D. Cranstoun, R. Jonas, G. Baltuch, and B. Litt. “High-
frequency oscillations and seizure generation in neocortical epilepsy.” In: Brain127.7
(2004), pp. 1496–1506. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh149.
[80]A. Matsumoto, B. H. Brinkmann, S. M. Stead, J. Matsumoto, M. T. Kucewicz, W. R.
Marsh, F. Meyer, G. Worrell, S. Matthew Stead, J. Matsumoto, M. T. Kucewicz, W. R.
Marsh,F.Meyer,andG.Worrell.“Pathologicalandphysiologicalhigh-frequencyoscillations
in focal human epilepsy.” In: J. Neurophysiol. 110.8 (2013), pp. 1958–1964. doi: 10.1152/
jn.00341.2013 .
[81]A. Thomschewski, A. S. Hincapié, and B. Frauscher. Localization of the epileptogenic zone
using high frequency oscillations . 2019. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00094.
[82]V. Gnatkovsky, M. De Curtis, C. Pastori, F. Cardinale, G. Lo Russo, R. Mai, L. Nobili, I.
Sartori, L. Tassi, and S. Francione. “Biomarkers of epileptogenic zone deﬁned by quantiﬁed
stereo-EEG analysis.” In: Epilepsia 55.2 (2014), pp. 296–305. doi: 10.1111/epi.12507.
[83]S. V. Gliske, Z. T. Irwin, C. Chestek, G. L. Hegeman, B. Brinkmann, O. Sagher, H. J. L.
Garton, G. A. Worrell, and W. C. Stacey. “Variability in the location of high frequency
oscillations during prolonged intracranial EEG recordings.” In: Nat. Commun. 9.1 (2018),
p. 2155. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04549-2.
[84]S. J. Peng, C. C. Chou, H. Y. Yu, C. Chen, D. J. Yen, S. Y. Kwan, S. P. Hsu, C. F. Lin,
H. H. Chen, and C. C. Lee. “Ictal networks of temporal lobe epilepsy: Views from high-
frequency oscillations in stereoelectroencephalography.” In: J. Neurosurg. 131.4 (2019),
pp. 1086–1094. doi: 10.3171/2018.6.JNS172844.
[85]C. Haegelen, P. Perucca, C. E. Châtillon, L. Andrade-Valença, R. Zelmann, J. Jacobs,
D. L. Collins, F. Dubeau, A. Olivier, and J. Gotman. “High-frequency oscillations, extent
of surgical resection, and surgical outcome in drug-resistant focal epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia
54.5 (2013), pp. 848–857. doi: 10.1111/epi.12075.
[86]A. Bragin, J. Engel, and R. J. Staba. High-frequency oscillations in epileptic brain . 2010.
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283373ac8.
[87]J. Jacobs, M. Zijlmans, R. Zelmann, C. É. Chatillon, J. Hall, A. Olivier, F. Dubeau, and
J. Gotman. “High-frequency electroencephalographic oscillations correlate with outcome of
epilepsy surgery.” In: Ann. Neurol. 67.2 (2010), pp. 209–220. doi: 10.1002/ana.21847.
[88]N. Usui, K. Terada, K. Baba, K. Matsuda, F. Nakamura, K. Usui, M. Yamaguchi, T.
Tottori, S. Umeoka, S. Fujitani, A. Kondo, T. Mihara, and Y. Inoue. “Clinical signiﬁcance
of ictal high frequency oscillations in medial temporal lobe epilepsy.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol.
122.9 (2011), pp. 1693–1700. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.02.006.
49. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[89]H. Fujiwara, H. M. Greiner, K. H. Lee, K. D. Holland-Bouley, J. H. Seo, T. Arthur, F. T.
Mangano, J. L. Leach, and D. F. Rose. “Resection of ictal high-frequency oscillations leads
to favorable surgical outcome in pediatric epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia 53.9 (2012), pp. 1607–
1617. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03629.x.
[90]H. Leung, C. X. Zhu, D. T. Chan, W. S. Poon, L. Shi, V. C. Mok, and L. K. Wong.
“Ictal high-frequency oscillations and hyperexcitability in refractory epilepsy.” In: Clin.
Neurophysiol. 126.11 (2015), pp. 2049–2057. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2015.01.009.
[91]H. Fujiwara, J. L. Leach, H. M. Greiner, K. D. Holland-Bouley, D. F. Rose, T. Arthur,
and F. T. Mangano. “Resection of ictal high frequency oscillations is associated with
favorable surgical outcome in pediatric drug resistant epilepsy secondary to tuberous
sclerosis complex.” In: Epilepsy Res. 126 (2016), pp. 90–97. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.
2016.07.005.
[92]W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C. Y. Fu, and A. C. Berg. “SSD:
Single shot multibox detector.” In: Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes
Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics) 9905 LNCS (2016), pp. 21–37. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-46448-0_2 .
[93]Y. Iimura, K. Jones, K. Hattori, Y. Okazawa, A. Noda, K. Hoashi, Y. Nonoda, E. Asano,
T. Akiyama, C. Go, A. Ochi, O. C. Snead, E. J. Donner, J. T. Rutka, J. M. Drake, and
H. Otsubo. “Epileptogenic high-frequency oscillations skip the motor area in children with
multilobar drug-resistant epilepsy.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol. 128.7 (2017), pp. 1197–1205.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.03.031.
[94]Y. Iimura, K. Jones, L. Takada, I. Shimizu, M. Koyama, K. Hattori, Y. Okazawa, Y.
Nonoda, E. Asano, T. Akiyama, C. Go, A. Ochi, O. C. Snead, E. J. Donner, J. T. Rutka,
J. M. Drake, and H. Otsubo. “Strong coupling between slow oscillations and wide fast
ripples in children with epileptic spasms: Investigation of modulation index and occurrence
rate.” In: Epilepsia 59.3 (2018), pp. 544–554. doi: 10.1111/epi.13995.
[95]M. Pail, P. Řehulka, J. Cimbálník, I. Doležalová, J. Chrastina, and M. Brázdil. “Frequency-
independent characteristics of high-frequency oscillations in epileptic and non-epileptic
regions.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol. 128.1 (2017), pp. 106–114. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.
10.011.
[96]S. Wang, N. K. So, B. Jin, I. Z. Wang, J. C. Bulacio, R. Enatsu, S. Dai, Z. Chen, J.
Gonzalez-Martinez, and I. M. Najm. “Interictal ripples nested in epileptiform discharge
help to identify the epileptogenic zone in neocortical epilepsy.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol.
128.6 (2017), pp. 945–951. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.03.033.
[97]C. Cuello-Oderiz, N. von Ellenrieder, R. Sankhe, A. Olivier, J. Hall, F. Dubeau, and J.
Gotman.“Valueofictalandinterictalepileptiformdischargesandhighfrequencyoscillations
for delineating the epileptogenic zone in patients with focal cortical dysplasia.” In: Clin.
Neurophysiol. 129.6 (2018), pp. 1311–1319. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2018.02.003.
[98]Y. Höller, R. Kutil, L. Klaﬀenböck, A. Thomschewski, P. M. Höller, A. C. Bathke, J.
Jacobs, A. C. Taylor, R. Nardone, and E. Trinka. “High-frequency oscillations in epilepsy
and surgical outcome. A meta-analysis.” In: Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9 (2015), p. 574. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2015.00574.
[99]A. M. Spring, D. J. Pittman, Y. Aghakhani, J. Jirsch, N. Pillay, L. E. Bello-Espinosa,
C. Josephson, and P. Federico. “Interrater reliability of visually evaluated high frequency
oscillations.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol. 128.3 (2017), pp. 433–441. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.
2016.12.017.
50. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[100]M. A. van ’t Klooster, N. E. van Klink, F. S. Leijten, R. Zelmann, T. A. Gebbink, P. H.
Gosselaar, K. P. Braun, G. J. Huiskamp, and M. Zijlmans. “Residual fast ripples in the
intraoperative corticogram predict epilepsy surgery outcome.” In: Neurology 85.2 (2015),
pp. 120–128. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001727.
[101]M. A. van ’t Klooster, N. E. van Klink, W. J. Zweiphenning, F. S. Leijten, R. Zelmann,
C. H. Ferrier, P. C. van Rijen, W. M. Otte, K. P. Braun, G. J. Huiskamp, and M. Zijlmans.
“Tailoring epilepsy surgery with fast ripples in the intraoperative electrocorticogram.” In:
Ann. Neurol. 81.5 (2017), pp. 664–676. doi: 10.1002/ana.24928.
[102]A. B. Gardner, G. A. Worrell, E. Marsh, D. Dlugos, and B. Litt. “Human and automated
detection of high-frequency oscillations in clinical intracranial EEG recordings.” In: Clin.
Neurophysiol. 118.5 (2007), pp. 1134–1143. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2006.12.019.
[103]R. J. Staba, C. L. Wilson, A. Bragin, and I. Fried. “Quantitative analysis of high-frequency
oscillations (80-500 Hz) recorded in human epileptic hippocampus and entorhinal cortex.”
In:J. Neurophysiol. 88.4 (2002), pp. 1743–1752. doi: 10.1152/jn.2002.88.4.1743.
[104]P. Höller, E. Trinka, and Y. Höller. High-Frequency Oscillations in the Scalp Electroen-
cephalogram: Mission Impossible without Computational Intelligence . 2018. doi: 10.1155/
2018/1638097 .
[105]M. A. van ‘t Klooster, N. E. van Klink, D. van Blooijs, C. H. Ferrier, K. P. Braun, F. S.
Leijten, G. J. Huiskamp, and M. Zijlmans. “Evoked versus spontaneous high frequency
oscillations in the chronic electrocorticogram in focal epilepsy.” In: Clin. Neurophysiol.
128.5 (2017), pp. 858–866. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.01.017.
[106]J. Engel and F. L. da Silva. High-frequency oscillations - Where we are and where we need
to go. 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.02.001.
[107]K. K, A. T, A. T, S. T, S. T, H. Y, A. M, E. F, O. M, and D. I. “Signiﬁcance of
High-frequency Electrical Brain Activity.” In: Acta Med. Okayama 71.3 (2017). doi:
10.18926/AMO/55201.
[108]D. Gloss, S. J. Nevitt, and R. Staba. The role of high-frequency oscillations in epilepsy
surgery planning. 2017. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010235.pub3.
[109]M. Wilson. “Network Topology and the Fragility of Tetrahedral Glass-Forming Liquids
Temperature dependent structure of liquids, melts and glasses View project Glassy and
liquid materials under pressure View project.” In: Artic. Phys. Rev. Lett. (2009). doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.157801.
[110]C. Piccardi and L. Tajoli. “Complexity, centralization, and fragility in economic networks.”
In:PLoS One 13.11 (2018). Ed. by S. Suweis, e0208265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0208265.
[111]W. Wei, K. Joseph, H. Liu, and K. M. Carley. “The fragility of twitter social networks
against suspended users.” In: Proc. 2015 IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Adv. Soc. Networks Anal.
Mining, ASONAM 2015. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, 2015, pp. 9–16. doi:
10.1145/2808797.2809316.
[112]M. A. Kramer and S. S. Cash. Epilepsy as a disorder of cortical network organization .
2012. doi: 10.1177/1073858411422754.
[113]X. Jin, D. A. Prince, and J. R. Huguenard. “Enhanced Excitatory Synaptic Connectivity
in Layer V Pyramidal Neurons of Chronically Injured Epileptogenic Neocortex in Rats.”
In:J. Neurosci. 26.18 (2006), pp. 4891–4900. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4361-05.2006.
51. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[114]J. DeFelipe. “Chandelier cells and epilepsy.” In: Brain122.10 (1999), pp. 1807–1822. doi:
10.1093/brain/122.10.1807.
[115]J. R. Hughes. Gamma, fast, and ultrafast waves of the brain: Their relationships with
epilepsy and behavior. 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2008.01.011 .
[116]B.Elahian,M.Yeasin,B.Mudigoudar,J.W.Wheless,andA.Babajani-Feremi.“Identifying
seizure onset zone from electrocorticographic recordings: A machine learning approach
based on phase locking value.” In: Seizure51 (2017), pp. 35–42. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.
2017.07.010.
[117]C. N. Heck, D. King-Stephens, A. D. Massey, D. R. Nair, B. C. Jobst, G. L. Barkley,
V. Salanova, A. J. Cole, M. C. Smith, R. P. Gwinn, C. Skidmore, P. C. Van Ness, G. K.
Bergey, Y. D. Park, I. Miller, E. Geller, P. A. Rutecki, R. Zimmerman, D. C. Spencer,
A. Goldman, J. C. Edwards, J. W. Leiphart, R. E. Wharen, J. Fessler, N. B. Fountain,
G. A. Worrell, R. E. Gross, S. Eisenschenk, R. B. Duckrow, L. J. Hirsch, C. Bazil, C. A.
O’Donovan, F. T. Sun, T. A. Courtney, C. G. Seale, and M. J. Morrell. “Two-year seizure
reduction in adults with medically intractable partial onset epilepsy treated with responsive
neurostimulation: Final results of the RNS System Pivotal trial.” In: Epilepsia 55.3 (2014),
pp. 432–441. doi: 10.1111/epi.12534.
[118]M. J. Morrell. “Responsive cortical stimulation for the treatment of medically intractable
partialepilepsy.” In: Neurology 77.13(2011),pp.1295–1304. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182302056 .
[119]K. J. Meador, R. Kapur, D. W. Loring, A. M. Kanner, and M. J. Morrell. “Quality of life
and mood in patients with medically intractable epilepsy treated with targeted responsive
neurostimulation.” In: Epilepsy Behav. 45 (2015), pp. 242–247. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.
2015.01.012.
[120]D. King-Stephens, E. Mirro, P. B. Weber, K. D. Laxer, P. C. Van Ness, V. Salanova, D. C.
Spencer, C. N. Heck, A. Goldman, B. Jobst, D. C. Shields, G. K. Bergey, S. Eisenschenk,
G. A. Worrell, M. A. Rossi, R. E. Gross, A. J. Cole, M. R. Sperling, D. R. Nair, R. P.
Gwinn, Y. D. Park, P. A. Rutecki, N. B. Fountain, R. E. Wharen, L. J. Hirsch, I. O. Miller,
G. L. Barkley, J. C. Edwards, E. B. Geller, M. J. Berg, T. L. Sadler, F. T. Sun, and
M. J. Morrell. “Lateralization of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with chronic ambulatory
electrocorticography.” In: Epilepsia 56.6 (2015), pp. 959–967. doi: 10.1111/epi.13010.
[121]D. W. Loring, R. Kapur, K. J. Meador, and M. J. Morrell. “Diﬀerential neuropsychological
outcomes following targeted responsive neurostimulation for partial-onset epilepsy.” In:
Epilepsia 56.11 (2015), pp. 1836–1844. doi: 10.1111/epi.13191.
[122]C. T. Anderson, T. K. Tcheng, F. T. Sun, and M. J. Morrell. “Day-Night Patterns of
Epileptiform Activity in 65 Patients with Long-Term Ambulatory Electrocorticography.”
In:J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 32.5 (2015), pp. 406–412. doi: 10.1097/WNP.0000000000000183 .
[123]F. T. Sun and M. J. Morrell. “The RNS System: Responsive cortical stimulation for
the treatment of refractory partial epilepsy.” In: Expert Rev. Med. Devices 11.6 (2014),
pp. 563–572. doi: 10.1586/17434440.2014.947274.
[124]G. K. Bergey, M. J. Morrell, E. M. Mizrahi, A. Goldman, D. King-Stephens, D. Nair, S.
Srinivasan, B. Jobst, R. E. Gross, D. C. Shields, G. Barkley, V. Salanova, P. Olejniczak, A.
Cole, S. S. Cash, K. Noe, R. Wharen, G. Worrell, A. M. Murro, J. Edwards, M. Duchowny,
D. Spencer, M. Smith, E. Geller, R. Gwinn, C. Skidmore, S. Eisenschenk, M. Berg, C.
Heck, P. Van Ness, N. Fountain, P. Rutecki, A. Massey, C. O’Donovan, D. Labar, R. B.
Duckrow, L. J. Hirsch, T. Courtney, F. T. Sun, and C. G. Seale. “Long-term treatment
52. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
with responsive brain stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures.” In: Neurology
84.8 (2015), pp. 810–817. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001280.
[125]J. Ho, T. Tumkaya, S. Aryal, H. Choi, and A. Claridge-Chang. Moving beyond P values:
data analysis with estimation graphics . 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0470-3.
[126]S. Holm. “A Simple Sequentially Rejective Multiple Test Procedure A Simple Sequentially
Rejective Multiple Test Procedure.” In: Source Scand. J. Stat. 6.2 (1979), pp. 65–70.
[127]P. Perucca, F. Dubeau, and J. Gotman. “Intracranial electroencephalographic seizure-
onset patterns: Eﬀect of underlying pathology.” In: Brain137.1 (2014), pp. 183–196. doi:
10.1093/brain/awt299 .
[128]A. H. Hawasli, S. K. Bandt, R. E. Hogan, N. Werner, and E. C. Leuthardt. “Laser ablation
as treatment strategy for medically refractory dominant insular epilepsy: Therapeutic and
functional considerations.” In: Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 92.6 (2014), pp. 397–404. doi:
10.1159/000366001.
[129]J. Gonzalez-Martinez and D. Lachhwani. “Stereoelectroencephalography in children with
cortical dysplasia: technique and results.” In: Child’s Nerv. Syst. 30.11 (2014), pp. 1853–
1857. doi: 10.1007/s00381-014-2499-z.
[130]J. Engel, M. F. Levesque, and W. D. Shields. Surgical treatment of the epilepsies: presurgical
evaluation. 1992.
[131]A. M. McIntosh, R. M. Kalnins, L. A. Mitchell, G. C. A. Fabinyi, R. S. Briellmann, and S. F.
Berkovic. “Temporal lobectomy: Long-term seizure outcome, late recurrence and risks for
seizure recurrence.” In: Brain127.9 (2004), pp. 2018–2030. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh221 .
[132]L. E. Jeha, I. M. Najm, W. E. Bingaman, F. Khandwala, P. Widdess-Walsh, H. H. Morris,
D. S. Dinner, D. Nair, N. Foldvary-Schaeﬀer, R. A. Prayson, Y. Comair, R. O’Brien,
J. Bulacio, A. Gupta, and H. O. Lüders. “Predictors of outcome after temporal lobectomy
for the treatment of intractable epilepsy.” In: Neurology 66.12 (2006), pp. 1938–1940. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000219810.71010.9b.
[133]H. Urbach, J. Hattingen, J. Von Oertzen, C. Luyken, H. Clusmann, T. Kral, M. Kurthen,
J. Schramm, I. Blümcke, and H. H. Schild. “MR imaging in the presurgical workup of
patients with drug-resistant epilepsy.” In: Am. J. Neuroradiol. 25.6 (2004), pp. 919–926.
doi: 25/6/919[pii]ET-2004/06/19 .
[134]B. Kemp, A. Värri, A. C. Rosa, K. D. Nielsen, and J. Gade. “A simple format for exchange
of digitized polygraphic recordings.” In: Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 82.5 (1992),
pp. 391–393. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(92)90009-7.
[135]C. Holdgraf, S. Appelhoﬀ, S. Bickel, K. Bouchard, S. D’Ambrosio, O. David, O. Devinsky,
B. Dichter, A. Flinker, B. L. Foster, K. J. Gorgolewski, I. Groen, D. Groppe, A. Gunduz,
L. Hamilton, C. J. Honey, M. Jas, R. Knight, J. P. Lachaux, J. C. Lau, C. Lee-Messer,
B. N. Lundstrom, K. J. Miller, J. G. Ojemann, R. Oostenveld, N. Petridou, G. Piantoni,
A. Pigorini, N. Pouratian, N. F. Ramsey, A. Stolk, N. C. Swann, F. Tadel, B. Voytek,
B. A. Wandell, J. Winawer, K. Whitaker, L. Zehl, and D. Hermes. “iEEG-BIDS, extending
the Brain Imaging Data Structure speciﬁcation to human intracranial electrophysiology.”
In:Sci. data 6.1 (2019), p. 102. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0105-7.
53. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[136]K. J. Gorgolewski, T. Auer, V. D. Calhoun, R. C. Craddock, S. Das, E. P. Duﬀ, G.
Flandin, S. S. Ghosh, T. Glatard, Y. O. Halchenko, D. A. Handwerker, M. Hanke, D.
Keator, X. Li, Z. Michael, C. Maumet, B. N. Nichols, T. E. Nichols, J. Pellman, J. B.
Poline, A. Rokem, G. Schaefer, V. Sochat, W. Triplett, J. A. Turner, G. Varoquaux,
and R. A. Poldrack. “The brain imaging data structure, a format for organizing and
describing outputs of neuroimaging experiments.” In: Sci. Data 3.1 (2016), p. 160044. doi:
10.1038/sdata.2016.44.
[137]A. Gramfort, M. Luessi, E. Larson, D. A. Engemann, D. Strohmeier, C. Brodbeck, R. Goj,
M. Jas, T. Brooks, L. Parkkonen, and M. Hämäläinen. “MEG and EEG data analysis with
MNE-Python.” In: Front. Neurosci. 7 (2013), p. 267. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00267 .
[138]A. Gramfort, M. Luessi, E. Larson, D. A. Engemann, D. Strohmeier, C. Brodbeck, L.
Parkkonen, and M. S. Hämäläinen. “MNE software for processing MEG and EEG data.”
In:Neuroimage 86 (2014), pp. 446–460.
[139]S. Appelhoﬀ, M. Sanderson, T. L. Brooks, M. van Vliet, R. Quentin, C. Holdgraf, M.
Chaumon, E. Mikulan, K. Tavabi, R. Höchenberger, D. Welke, C. Brunner, A. P. Rockhill,
E. Larson, S. K. Herbst, R. Luke, A. Li, A. Gramfort, and M. Jas. “MNE-BIDS: MNE-
Python + BIDS = easy dataset interaction.” In: Organ. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2020. doi:
10.5281/ZENODO.3890935.
[140]S. Van Der Walt, S. C. Colbert, and G. Varoquaux. “The NumPy array: A structure
for eﬃcient numerical computation.” In: Comput. Sci. Eng. 13.2 (2011), pp. 22–30. doi:
10.1109/MCSE.2011.37 .
[141]P. Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientiﬁc computing in Python.”
In:Nat. Methods 17.3 (2020), pp. 261–272. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[142]J. D. Hunter. “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment.” In: Comput. Sci. Eng. 9.3 (2007),
pp. 99–104. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
[143]M.W.O.B.D.O.P.H.S.L.D.C.G.T.A.Y.H.J.B.C.J.W.J.d.R.C.P.S.H.J.V.S.V.G.K.
Qalieh.mwaskom/seaborn: v0.8.1 (September 2017). 2017. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.883859 .
[144]R. Vallat. “Pingouin: statistics in Python.” In: J. Open Source Softw. 3.31 (2018), p. 1026.
doi: 10.21105/joss.01026 .
[145]S. Raschka. “MLxtend: Providing machine learning and data science utilities and extensions
to Python’s scientiﬁc computing stack.” In: J. Open Source Softw. 3.24 (2018), p. 638. doi:
10.21105/joss.00638.
[146]F. Pedregosa, V. Michel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, J. Vanderplas, D. Cour-
napeau, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, V. Dubourg, A. Passos, M.
Brucher, M. Perrot, and É. Duchesnay. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” In: J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 12.85 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[147]J. Gonzalez-Martinez and I. M. Najm. “Indications and selection criteria for invasive
monitoring in children with cortical dysplasia.” In: Child’s Nerv. Syst. 30.11 (2014),
pp. 1823–1829. doi: 10.1007/s00381-014-2497-1.
[148]E. C. Lewis, A. G. Weil, M. Duchowny, S. Bhatia, J. Ragheb, and I. Miller. “MR-guided
laser interstitial thermal therapy for pediatric drug-resistant lesional epilepsy.” In: Epilepsia
56.10 (2015), pp. 1590–1598. doi: 10.1111/epi.13106.
[149]L. Ross, A. M. Naduvil, J. C. Bulacio, I. M. Najm, and J. A. Gonzalez-Martinez.
“Stereoelectroencephalography-Guided Laser Ablations in Patients With Neocortical Phar-
macoresistant Focal Epilepsy: Concept and Operative Technique.” In: Oper. Neurosurg.
(2018). doi: 10.1093/ons/opy022.
54. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 
[150]J. Chen, Z. Huang, L. Li, L. Ren, and Y. Wang. “Histological type of focal cortical dysplasia
is associated with the risk of postsurgical seizure in children and adolescents.” In: Ther.
Clin. Risk Manag. 15 (2019), pp. 877–884. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S203039.
[151]P. Krsek, T. Pieper, A. Karlmeier, M. Hildebrandt, D. Kolodziejczyk, P. Winkler, E. Pauli,
I. Blümcke, and H. Holthausen. “Diﬀerent presurgical characteristics and seizure outcomes
in children with focal cortical dysplasia type I or II.” In: Epilepsia 50.1 (2009), pp. 125–137.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01682.x.
[152]U. Heinemann, A. Konnerth, R. Pumain, and W. J. Wadman. “Extracellular calcium and
potassium concentration changes in chronic epileptic brain tissue.” In: Adv. Neurol. 44
(1986), pp. 641–61.
[153]K. A. Ludwig, R. M. Miriani, N. B. Langhals, M. D. Joseph, D. J. Anderson, and D. R.
Kipke. “Using a Common Average Reference to Improve Cortical Neuron Recordings
From Microelectrode Arrays.” In: J. Neurophysiol. 101.3 (2009), pp. 1679–1689. doi:
10.1152/jn.90989.2008.
[154]P. D. Welch. “The Use of Fast Fourier Transform for the Estimation of Power Spectra: A
Method Based on Time Averaging Over Short, Modiﬁed Periodograms.” In: IEEE Trans.
Audio Electroacoust. 15.2 (1967), pp. 70–73. doi: 10.1109/TAU.1967.1161901.
[155]M. Skocik, J. Collins, C. Callahan-Flintoft, H. Bowman, and B. Wyble. “I Tried a Bunch
of Things: The Dangers of Unexpected Overﬁtting in Classiﬁcation.” In: bioRxiv(2016),
p. 078816. doi: 10.1101/078816 .
[156]Y. Qin and C. E. Priebe. “Robust hypothesis testing via Lq-likelihood.” In: Stat. Sin. 27.4
(2017), pp. 1793–1813. doi: 10.5705/ss.202015.0441.
[157]A. Alyakin, Y. Qin, and C. E. Priebe. “LqRT: Robust Hypothesis Testing of Location
Parameters using Lq-Likelihood-Ratio-Type Test in Python.” In: Arxiv(2019).
[158]D. Lakens. “Calculating and reporting eﬀect sizes to facilitate cumulative science: A
practical primer for t-tests and ANOVAs.” In: Front. Psychol. 4.NOV (2013). doi: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2013.00863.
[159]A.Niculescu-MizilandR.Caruana.“Predictinggoodprobabilitieswithsupervisedlearning.”
In:ICML 2005 - Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press, 2005, pp. 625–632. doi: 10.1145/1102351.1102430.
55. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under awas not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted November 14, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/862797doi: bioRxiv preprint 